BESE Authorized Charter School Transportation Plan

Overview
The Louisiana Department of Education is committed to ensuring that all students have access to the
school of their choice. The Louisiana Board of Elementary and Secondary Education (BESE) requires all
state-authorized charter schools to provide transportation to and from school for all students living in the
parish in which the school is located and who live more than 1 mile from the school. Section 2801 of
Bulletin 126 outlines the criteria for the provision of transportation of students.

Exemptions: ​Type 2 charter schools not providing transportation and schools wishing to reimburse
students for transportation (i.e. issuing tokens for public transportation)

Transportation Plans
The Louisiana Department of Education is responsible for approving Transportation Plans for all
state-authorized charter schools.

Transportation Plans, which shall include the subsequent cover page of this document and the requested
school transportation policy, should be submitted to the Louisiana Department of Education
charters@la.gov by July 31st of each year. Charter Management Organizations may submit separate plans
for individual schools or one plan for the entire organization.

Transportation Oversight
Each school is expected to abide by the policies and procedures outlined in the approved Transportation
Plan, relevant BESE policy, and R.S. 17:158. Schools that fall out of compliance with existing BESE policy
or do not follow the​guidelines set forth in their approved Transportation Plans may be subject to LDOE
intervention procedures as outlined in the Charter School Performance Compact.

School Transportation Policy Requirements
In addition to the information listed in the table below, this policy must include the process implemented
when the parent or guardian of a student under the age of 10 or with a relevant transportation
accommodation in the student’s IEP is not at the bus stop.

Transportation policies may also include the following information:
    ●​ Student bus behavior expectations that align with the school’s class behavior expectations and the
       BESE Model Master Discipline Plan
    ●​ Procedures for assigning bus stops to new students
    ●​ Procedures for parents and students to notify the school of issues involving transportation
    ●​ Bus driver behavior expectations
    ●​ Communication procedures between the bus operator, the school, and parents in the event of an
       emergency situation.




Louisiana Department of Education
doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 • Baton Rouge, LA • 70804-9064​                                       5/25
BESE Authorized Charter School Transportation Plan
   Louisiana Charter School Transportation Data Sheet                                        Charter Type: ​☐​2 ​☐​4 ​☐​5
 School                                                         CMO Name
 Name(s):                                                       (if applicable):


 Transportation Point of Contact Name:

 Transportation Point of Contact Phone:

 Transportation Point of Contact Email:

 Method(s) of transportation provided to students:              ​Check all that apply:

                                                                ☐​ ​Partnership with local school district
                                                                ☐​ ​Contracting with private transportation provider(s)
                                                                ☐​ ​Buses or vans owned by school
                                                                ☐​ ​Providing students access to public transportation
                                                                ☐​ ​Other (please describe in attached documents)

 List the name(s) of the transportation provider(s)
 selected in the row above and provide a copy of
 the partnership agreement or contract.

 If a provider has not yet been selected, please
 indicate how your organization will obtain a
 transportation provider for the current school year.

 How many students do you anticipate will need
 transportation?

 Summarize the method(s) and provider(s) your
 organization will use to provide transportation to
 students with specific transportation
 accommodations in their IEP:


Assurance is hereby made to the State Department of Education that this Transportation Plan has been developed in
compliance with all applicable BESE policies and procedures and that all transportation employees either contracted
with or employed directly by the LEA have received required background checks through the LBCI. All documentation
relevant to this Transportation Plan shall be maintained on file by the local education agency.



 School Leader Signature                                    ​        ​    ​        ​     ​       ​        Date


Louisiana Department of Education
doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 • Baton Rouge, LA • 70804-9064​                                                        5/25
