Understanding Public Bid Law
        La. R.S. 38:2211-2293



       BRETT ROBINSON

    ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL
     LOUISIANA DEPARTMENT OF
              JUSTICE
Understanding Public Bid Law
           La. R.S. 38:2211-2293



 This presentation will cover some of the
 basics of the Louisiana Public Bid Law and
 provide a broad overview of its use.
     What is the Public Bid Law?

 Haughton Elevator Div. v. State. – Louisiana
 Supreme Court

 Public Bid Law: is a prohibitory law founded on public
 policy.

 “It was enacted in the interest of the taxpaying citizen
 and has for its purpose their protection against
 contracts of public officials entered into because of
 favoritism and possibly involving exorbitant and
 extortionate prices.”
     What is the Public Bid Law?

 The purpose of the Public Bid law is to ensure that
 public entities are receiving the best possible price
 when expending public funds.

 The public bid law governs:
  (1) Contracts for public works

  (2) Purchases of materials and supplies
   Who does the Public Bid Law apply to?

                            Depends…
 (1) Public works
  All public entities must follow the public bid law for public
   works in excess of the contract threshold amount.

 (2) Materials and supplies
  Political subdivisions and local government -- follow the
   public bid law for the purchase of materials and supplies.

  The  State executive branch, and any State agencies,
   boards, and commissions -- follow the Louisiana
   Procurement Code for the purchase of materials and supplies.

  Louisiana    Legislature/Judiciary -- follow the public bid
   law for public works only.
  Who does the Public Bid Law apply to?

                   What is a Public Entity?
 La. R.S. 38:2211(11)


 "Public entity" means and includes the state of Louisiana, or any
  agency, board, commission, department, or public corporation of the
  state.

 Also includes:
   Political subdivisions

   Public housing authorities

   Public school boards

   Any public officers
  Who does the Public Bid Law apply to?

           La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 18-0006
What about a charter school support organization?
 Charter school leased land from the local school board.
 Land was subleased to a non-profit foundation (charter school support
  organization).
 Charter school support organization constructed the building and
  leased the land and building back to the charter school for operation.

 M.K.L. Development LLC v. City of New Orleans (4th Circuit): The
  public bid law does not “follow the building.”
 Look to who is constructing the public work.
 Result: A private charter school support organization is not a public
  entity under the public bid law.
 Who does the Public Bid Law apply to?

       La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 15-0080


 Is a 501(c)(3) Volunteer Fire Department a
 public entity?
  Who does the Public Bid Law apply to?

           La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 15-0080

 Local Government Budget Act … No

 Public Records Law … Yes, but only to the extent it is performing a
  governmental function and expending public funds.

 Open Meetings Law … No

 Audit Law … It’s considered a Quasi Public Entity. (So, yes it still
  must submit audits to the Louisiana Legislative Auditor.)

 Public Bid Law … No
PUBLIC WORKS
   Title 38 Chapter 10
             Public Works

What is a Public Work?

 La. R.S. 38:2211(A)(12) defines public work
 as:
  “…    any contract for the erection,
   construction, alteration, improvement, or
   repair of any public facility or immovable
   property owned, used, or leased by a public
   entity.”
                     Public Works
 This includes, but is not limited to, the following:
   Construction

   Remodeling

   Utilities

   Roads and Bridges

   Improvements

   Demolition?
     La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 10-0026 – Contract for demolition is
      not a public work.
     Concrete      Busters of LA, Inc. v. The Board of
      Commissioners of the Port of New Orleans (4th Circuit) –
      (2010) Contract for demolition is a public work because demolition
      results in the alteration of immovable property.
                Public Works

            THRESHOLD AMOUNT:

 The public bid law applies when there is a total
 project cost of $250,000 or more


 Historically, this threshold amount     is adjusted
 annually by the Office of Facility Planning and
 Control by an amount not to exceed to Consumer
 Price Index (CPI). Without legislative approval, this
 amount will not increase until 2025.
               Public Works

 Calculating the Total Project Cost:


  Labor

  Materials

  Equipment (as per the rates in the Associated

   Equipment Dealers Rental Rate Book)
  Administrative Overhead not to exceed 15%
                        Public Works

                          Services:
 Public Bid Law does not apply to the purchase of
 Services
    Professional or Otherwise – (Architects, Engineers,
     Attorneys, etc.)
    Insurance services through an insurance agent are
     professional services, not public works. La. Atty.
     Gen. Op. No. 16-0153
    Solid   Waste Management transportation and landfill
     management are services. However, La. 33:4169.1 would
     require advertisement and bids when an exclusive franchise
     agreement is being offered. There is no such requirement on a
     “time contract.” La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 94-108
                   Public Works
                     Maintenance:
 Maintenance contracts must be for a fixed annual fee
 and shall extend for a duration of not less than two (2)
 years. These contracts are only for the repair and
 maintenance of public facilities owned, controlled or
 operated by a public entity.
 Such contracts shall include a nonappropriation clause.
 Maintenance contracts are not considered a public work
 when the above requirements are met.
 However, materials and supplies over the threshold
 amount must still be purchased pursuant to the public
 bid law.
                         Public Works

 La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 21-0097
  “Digging” contract called for the contractor to use a concrete breaker
   and backhoes to break concrete and digging. The purpose for such
   work was for Waterworks District personnel to check and repair
   items such as service connections, valves, suspected leaks, etc.
  “Labor and Equipment” contract called for the contractor to provide
   all extraordinary mechanical equipment and labor required for
   repairs to main waterlines, fire hydrants, and paved streets as well as
   maintenance to all Waterworks District facilities.
  No project or repair under either contract would individually reach
   the threshold limit but combined, each contract would exceed the
   threshold requirement for letting out for bid. Each contract would
   annually cost approximately $300,000.
  Contracts could be let out for bid or negotiated as maintenance
   contracts if in compliance with the provisions of La. R.S. 38:2212(U).
                            Public Works

              Public Work or Maintenance?
 Maintenance:
   La. Atty. Gen. Op. Nos. 10-0058, 05-0260, 02-0418, 89-276, 88-392
   Cemetery maintenance

   Routine removal of fallen trees, weeds, and other debris

   Landscaping and grounds keeping



 A/C and Heating Repair:
     Maintenance – Tiger Air & Heat, LLC v. Jefferson Parish School Board (5th
      Circuit)


 Dredging near a Port’s docks:
   Recurring maintenance that does need not be publicly bid.
   La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 16-0082
  What documents must be included in the Bid?

 Bid documents shall only require the following: La. R.S.
  38:2212(B)(2)

 Louisiana Uniform Bid Form
   Bid Bond or Bid Security
   Acknowledgement of Addenda

   Base Bid and alternates, if any

   Signature of Bidder

   Name, Title, and Address of bidder

   Name of Firm or Joint Venture

   Corporate Resolution or written evidence of authority of the person
    signing the bid
   Louisiana Contractors License Number (on the envelope)

   Unit price and description for each unit (where unit prices are utilized)
  What documents must be included in the Bid?


 Other documents/info may be requested of the lowest
  bidder and must be submitted within 10 days of the bid
  opening. (Attestation Affidavit and E-Verify)

 However, the only documents that a public entity is allowed
  to require bidders to submit prior to the opening of bids is
  that which is contained in La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(2).
What documents must be included in the Bid?

What bidding documents can public entities
        require bidders to submit?

           La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(1)

                    vs.

           La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(2)
Durr Heavy Const., L.L.C. v. City of New Orleans
             (LA Supreme Court)


 La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(1):
  “Theprovisions and requirements of this Section and
  those stated in the bidding documents shall not be
  waived by any entity.”


 La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(2):
  “The bidding documents shall require only the following
  information and documentation to be submitted by a
  bidder at the time designated in the advertisement for bid
  opening…”
 Durr Heavy Const., L.L.C. v. City of New Orleans
              (LA Supreme Court)


 In the Invitation to Bid, the City included a boxed
  section requiring the sealed envelope bids bear the
  proposal number.
 Neither the lowest bidder or the second lowest
  bidder included the proposal number on the outside
  of the sealed envelopes.
 City awarded the contract to the lowest bidder.
 Durr filed suit alleging the lowest and second lowest
  bidders were non-responsive.
 Durr Heavy Const., L.L.C. v. City of New Orleans
              (LA Supreme Court)


 The trial court ruled in favor of the City.
 However, the appellate court reversed, finding that the
  requirement to include the proposal number on the front of
  the envelope was a non-waivable requirement under La.
  R.S. 38:2212(B)(1).
 A divided Louisiana Supreme Court (4-3) disagreed and
  reinstated the trial court’s ruling and awarded the contract
  to the lowest bidder.
 The Supreme Court’s holding simply states: “The ruling of
  the court of appeal is reversed. We hereby reinstate the
  district court’s order…”
 Durr Heavy Const., L.L.C. v. City of New Orleans
              (LA Supreme Court)


 C.J. Johnson’s concurrence held that La. R.S.
  38:2212(B)(2) contains the exclusive list of items that
  the bidding documents shall require the bidder to
  submit.
   Essentially, public entities cannot require bidders submit anything
    more than what is required in La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(2).

 However, J. Crichton’s dissent stated that La. R.S.
  38:2212(B)(1) clearly prohibits public entities from
  waiving any requirements in the bid documents.
   La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(1) has an “and” for a reason.
   “The provisions and requirements of this Section [i.e., those in La.
    R.S. 38:2212(B)(2)] and those stated in the bidding documents [any
    others required by the public entity] shall not be waived by any
    entity.”
What documents must be included in the Bid?

What bidding documents can public entities
        require bidders to submit?



                  Current Law:
   Only those stated in La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(2)
  What documents must be included in the Bid?

         La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 15-0139

 Can a municipality require a bidder to submit the:
   American Institute of Architects (“AIA”) Document
    A305?
   Engineers  Joint Contract Documents Committee
    (“EJDC”) Qualifications Statement C-451?

 YES – But only after opening bids! (10 days)
What documents must be included in the Bid?

Contractor’s number on the sealed envelope?
La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 17-0105
 The failure of the low bidder to include its contractors license
  number on the sealed envelope does render its bid non-
  responsive.
 Must answer the question: Is the requirement in La. R.S.
  38:2212(B)(2)?
 If YES, then the requirement cannot be waived.
 Hamp’s Construction, LLC v. City of New Orleans (LA Supreme
  Court): “A public entity does not have the discretion to
  determine, after bids have been submitted, whether a
  requirement is substantive or non-substantive, waivable or non-
  waivable.”
  What documents must be included in the Bid?

    Written evidence of the authority of the
            person signing the bid

 Ryan Gootee General Contractors, LLC v. Plaquemines
  Parish School Board & One Construction, Inc. (5th Circuit)

 Dynamic Constructors, L.L.C. v. Plaquemines Parish
  Government (4th Circuit)

 LeBlanc Marin, LLC v. Division of Administration, Office
  of Facility Planning and Control (Supreme Court)
Ryan Gootee General Contractors, LLC v. Plaquemines Parish
     School Board & One Construction, Inc. (5th Circuit)


 La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(5):
   Written evidence of the authority of the person signing the bid for public
    works shall be submitted at the time of bidding.
   The authority of the signature of the person submitting the bid shall be
    deemed sufficient and acceptable if any of the following conditions are
    met:
     (a) The signature on the bid is that of any corporate officer,
      or of any member of a partnership, LLC, LLP, or other legal
      entity on file with the secretary of state.
     (b) The signature on the bid is that of an authorized representative as
      documented by the legal entity certifying the authority of the person.
     (c) The legal entity has filed in the appropriate records of the secretary
      of state of this state, an affidavit or resolution indicating the names of
      all parties authorized to submit bids for public contracts.
Ryan Gootee General Contractors, LLC v. Plaquemines Parish
     School Board & One Construction, Inc. (5th Circuit)



 The low bid in this case was signed by a managing
  member of the LLC.
 The Fifth Circuit held that the second sentence of La.
  R.S. 38:2212(B)(5) does not exempt bidders from
  complying with the first sentence.
 Essentially, all bids must be accompanied by written
  evidence of the authority of the person signing the
  bid.
Dynamic Constructors, L.L.C. v. Plaquemines Parish
             Government (4th Circuit)


 Is simply stating that you are the owner of the firm sufficient?


 The owner of Dynamic Constructors, L.L.C signed the bid as
  “First Name – Last Name, Owner”

 NOT sufficient.


 The Public Bid Law requires the bidder to present some form of
  written evidence or documentation substantiating that the signer
  of the bid had the requisite authority to sign on the bidder’s
  behalf.
         LeBlanc Marine, LLC v. Division of
          Administration (Supreme Court)

 State’s bidding instructions limited bidders to only two of
  the types of evidence for proof of authority rather than
  including all three methods of evidence of proof.

 State’s bidding instructions were facially invalid and
  must yield to the mandatory statutory requirements in
  the Public Bid Law.

 Bidding instructions which conflict with, rather than
  merely exceed, the statutory requirements and
  procedures set forth in the Public Bid Law are not valid.
          Advertising: Public Works
 All advertisements shall occur once a week for Three (3) Different
  Weeks in the newspaper of the locality
   First ad must appear at least 25 days before bid opening date
   First ad cannot begin on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday


 Advertisement must indicate time and place of any mandatory pre-
  bid conference and must state when and where bids will be opened

 If a public entity is required by law to provide bidders with the option
  of submitting their bids electronically, the public entity must also
  publish a copy of the bid documents on the website accepting the
  electronic bids.

 All bidding documents and complete plans/specifications must be
  available on the date of 1st advertisement and remain so until 24
  hours before bidding.
                  Advertising: Addendum

 Addenda are use to make changes to the bid documents


 The bid period may be extended up to 30 days through the issuance of an
  addendum without the requirement of re-advertising;

HOWEVER:

 If addendum is issued within 7 days of the bid opening, the public entity must
  transmit a copy of the addendum within 24 hours to all prime bidders who
  have requested bid documents
   If the addendum cannot be transmitted, bid opening must postponed at least
     7 days
 If addendum is issued within 72 hours of the advertised time of bid opening:
   Entity must extend the opening of bids at least 7 but no more than 21
     working days
              Advertising: Addendum

 Can the public entity require bidders to include the
                  addendum date?
La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 17-0175
 The failure of the low bidder to insert the addendum date on the
  Uniform Public Bid Form does NOT render the bid non-responsive.
 Public entity issued two addenda for a bulkhead project requiring
  each bidder to acknowledge receipt of the addenda by placing each
  addendum number and date in the space provided.
 Low bidder placed the number of each addendum but not the date.
 La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(2): “Acknowledgment of Addenda”
 Public entities cannot require bidders to provide anything beyond
  what is required in La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(2) for initial bids.
               How are Bids delivered?

 Delivery in one of three ways:
   (1) Hand delivered by bidder or agent
     Written receipt given to bidder

   (2) May be sent through registered or certified mail with
    return receipt requested
   (3) Submitted electronically (if applicable)



 Public entities cannot accept any bids on days
  recognized as holidays by United States Postal
  Service
   This includes hand delivered bids
                  Electronic Bidding

 Public entities shall provide a uniform and secure
  electronic interactive system for the submittal of bids
  for both public works and the purchase of materials
  and supplies requiring competitive bidding.
 Public entities may require that all bids be
  submitted electronically.
 Standards set by the L.A.C. 4:XV.701
 Exceptions:
  Public entities without available high speed internet access
  Any parish with a police jury form of government and a
   population of less than 20,000
         Opening of Bids
   Bids must be publicly opened and read aloud at the
    time and place in the advertisement.
   Late bids should be marked with the time and date
    and returned to the bidder unopened.
   Bids become public records – 14 days after bid
    opening or recommendation of award, whichever is
    sooner.
   No comment should be made at bid opening about
    the low bid or about award.
                Bid Evaluation
 La. R.S. 38:2212(A)(1)




   Public works contracts are awarded to the
    lowest responsible and responsive
                   bidder.
            Bid Evaluation

“Responsibility”
  Refers to the character or quality of the
  bidder
  Past experience with bidder?
  Are you safe doing business with this
    contractor?
           Bid Evaluation

“Responsiveness”

    Has bidder offered you what you ask
     for?
                  Bid Evaluation
 Rejection as a Non-Responsible bidder requires
 the following:

  Written notice to bidder including the reasons for disqualification

  An opportunity for hearing within 5 days of the notice of
   disqualification
    Hearing acts as a condition precedent to any action by the bidder
      against the public entity.
  Public entity will issue a written ruling within 5 days of the hearing

  Contract cannot be awarded to another bidder until ruling has been
   sent
           Bid Evaluation

 Rejection for Non-Responsive
  Notify bidder of reason why rejected

  Award to next lowest responsible and

  responsive bidder
      ATTORNEY GENERAL OPINIONS

             La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 15-0139
*Remember:

 La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(3)(a): (10-day requirement)

     “If the apparent low bidder does not submit the proper
      information or documentation as required by the bidding
      documents within the ten-day period, such bidder shall be
      declared non-responsive…”

 Next lowest bidder has 10 days from the date the lowest bidder is disqualified
  to submit the required information.
                   Canceling Bid
       The public entity may cancel solicitation for bids for
        any reason before bid opening

       Must have just cause after bids opened to cancel
        solicitation.

       Just Cause includes:
         Lack of sufficient funds for the project
         Failure of any bidder to submit a bid within pre-
          construction estimates (i.e., all bids are over budget)
         Substantial change in scope or design of project
         Decision to not go forward with the project for at least 12
          months from the opening of bids.
        Ballay v. Cormier (4th Circuit)
 Plaquemine Parish advertised bidding for the renovation of the Parish’s
  District Attorneys office. One of the plaintiffs, CDW Services, LLC,
  provided the lowest bid and was awarded the project.
 However, between the time bidding was announced by the interim
  president and the documents were finalized, a new parish president
  was sworn in and he rejected the bid.
 This was done so under the claim that the parish did not have the
  adequate funding, and was still waiting on federal funding for the
  project.
 Both CDW and the DA (Mr. Ballay) filed:
   (1) Writs of Mandamus to compel the president to sign the
    finalized contract; and
   (2) Petition for a Temporary Restraining
    Order/Preliminary Injunction to prohibit the Parish from
    alienating or encumbering the funds appropriated for the project.
         Ballay v. Cormier (4th Circuit)

 The Fourth Circuit upheld the issuing of the writ of
 mandamus stating:

 “Once the public entity has exercised its option and
 accepted a lowest responsible bid, it cannot reject all bids
 and re-advertise the project.”
                Withdrawing a Bid


 Must be done within 48 hours of bid opening


 Must be done by affidavit


 Only for “patently obvious, unintentional and substantial
  mechanical, clerical or mathematical errors, or errors of
  unintentional omission of a substantial quantity of work, labor,
  material, or services”
                  Withdrawing a Bid

 Barriere Construction Co, LLC v. Parish of Tangipahoa (First Circuit
  2018)

 Lowest bidder’s base bid total contained a clerical error as its unit
  prices extended would have increased the base bid

 Letter sent from the lowest bidder to the parish clarified its base bid
  total based on the unit prices extended as per La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(6)(c)
  (increase in amount) and still maintained its lowest bid status

 Court held that the lowest bidder was not required to withdraw their
  bid as per La. R.S. 38:2214(C) or (D) for the error as the specific
  provision in 2212(B)(6)(c) recently enacted controlled and the parish
  was not waiving or acting in noncompliance with the PBL.
                  Awarding the Contract
                            -- Timeline --

 (1) Award
   Within 45 days of opening of bids the public entity must award the
    contract to the lowest bidder or:
         Reject bids for just cause; or
         Extend the deadline with consent of lowest bidder
 (2) Execute
   Within 60 days of award, the public entity must execute the contract.


 (3) Notice to Proceed
   Within 30 days of the execution of the contract, Notice to
    Proceed must be given, subject to mutual consent of the parties.

 These provisions do not apply when the public entity is
  financing the project through the sale of bonds. (other time
  delays…Bond Commission approval, going to market, etc.)
    Amending the Contract after Execution

 All public work contracts shall contain provisions authorizing the
  issuance of change orders within the scope of the contract.

 “Change order” means any contract modification that includes an
  alteration, deviation, addition, or omission as to a preexisting public
  work contract, which authorizes an adjustment in the contract price,
  contract time, or an addition, deletion, or revision of work.

 All change orders must be in writing or in electronic format if the
  public entity has the capability to receive change orders
  electronically.

 Public entity must pay the contractor for the change order within 60
  days of approving the application for change order.
                     Change Orders

 “Change      order within the scope of the
  contract” means a change order which does not
  alter the nature of the thing to be constructed and
  which is an integral part of the project objective.
 Any change order within the scope of the contract
  must be negotiated in the public entity’s best interest
  or let out for bid.
  As a best practice for the use of public funds, change orders
   above the threshold amount should be let out for bid.
                   Change Orders

 “Change order outside the scope of the contract”
 means a change order which alters the nature of the
 thing to be constructed or which is not an integral part of
 the project objective.

 Any change order outside the scope of the contract in
 excess of the threshold amount (currently $250,000)
 shall be let out for public bid.

 La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 03-0263: Additional public
 works outside the scope of the contract should not be
 performed through a change order.
                  Change Orders


 Where the change order is negotiated, the public
 entity shall require that such change order be fully
 documented and itemized as to costs.

 Where certain unit prices are contained in the initial
 contract, no deviations shall be allowed in computing
 negotiated change order costs.
                      Change Orders

                          Recordation
 If the change order:
  Adds an amount of 10% or more of the original contract amount and
   is at least $10,000; or
  All change orders to a contract aggregating to an amount of 20% or
   more of the original contract amount and is at least $10,000, then
 The change order shall be recorded by the public entity in
  the mortgage records in the parish where the work is to
  be done not later than 30 days after the date of the
  change order which requires that the recordation take
  place.
 In addition, the original contract shall be recorded
  together with the change orders if not previously
  recorded.
MATERIALS AND
  SUPPLIES
    Purchases of Materials and Supplies


 Equipment

 Vehicles

 Supplies

 All Other Movable
 Property
 Some Exceptions
       Purchases of Materials and Supplies

 For Political Subdivisions and Local
 Government (Executive Branch entities follow the LPC)
 Below $10K –
    No procedure specified
 $10K to $30K –
    At least 3 quotes via telephone, fax, email, or other printable electronic form
    If telephone quotes are received, a written confirmation of the accepted offers
     shall be obtained and made a part of the purchase file.
    If quotations lower than the accepted quotation are received, the reasons for
     their rejection shall be recorded in the file.
 $30K and Above –
    Advertise for sealed bids
     Advertising: Materials and Supplies

 All advertisements shall occur Two (2) times in the newspaper of the
  locality.
   First ad must appear 15 days before bid opening date
   First ad cannot begin on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday


 All bidding documents and complete plans/specifications must be available
  on the date of 1st advertisement and remain so until 24 hours before bid
  opening date.

 Must include the time and place for delivery of bids and the time and place
  where bids will be publicly opened.

 Cannot accept any bids on days recognized as holidays by United States
  Postal Service
   This includes hand delivery
                Specifications
 Alternates:

  Maximum of 3 alternates

  Alternate bid by any other name still an alternate

  Alternates, if accepted, shall be accepted in the
   order that they are listed on the bid form, unless
   accepting them out of order does not change the
   determination of the low bidder.
           Specifications




Do you have to provide an alternate
     bid if one is requested?
                        Specifications

            La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 15-0052
 Municipality sought bids to replace a storage tank at its water
  treatment facility
 The Base Bid was for an “epoxy-coated steel tank”
 Alternate Bid No.1 was for a “glass-to-steel fused tank” in lieu of an
  epoxy-coated tank.
 When bids were opened, the apparent bidder on the base bid provided
  “No Price” in the space provided for Alternate Bid No. 1
 Instructions stated to complete all spaces on the bid form
 Great Lakes Dredge & Dock Co., LLC v. State (1st Circuit): Failure to
  supply a price for an alternate renders the bid non-responsive.
 The AG’s office opined: “… the apparent low bidder’s failure to
  complete all blanks renders their bid non-responsive and warrants a
  mandatory rejection.”
               Specifications
 Particular Brand:

  Public entities may specify a particular brand,
   make, or manufacturer using the model or
   catalog number

  Equivalent products may be accepted (subject to
   similar quality standards)
   Professional Services




Is it Materials & Supplies
            or
  Professional Services?
                    Professional Services

                                  14-0217
 A   contract for the design and preparation of an
  informational report between a sheriff’s office and a private
  entity is a contract for services and not subject to the public
  bid law.
 However…
   The printing of the report is subject to the public bid law
   La. R.S. 38:2255:

       “… such contracts shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder who
        is a Louisiana firm, who will comply with the terms of this statute,
        unless the bid submitted by any firm outside the State of Louisiana
        is at least three per cent lower than the lowest bid submitted by a
        Louisiana firm.”
                Professional Services

                           14-0142
 A Parish Hospital Service District and a food vendor executed an
  agreement which stated that the food service vendor would
  prepare food for patients and visitors as well as supply
  equipment and décor for the Parish Medical Center
 The AG’s office opined that this agreement was likely for
  materials & supplies and therefore subject to the public bid law

 La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 07-0278 – A factual determination
  must be made as to the predominant component of the
  transaction. Is it predominantly “materials & supplies” or
  predominantly “services”?
EXCEPTIONS
              Piggybacking

What is piggybacking?

 The State, levee districts, levee drainage districts,
 municipalities, and parishes, or other political
 subdivisions may purchase materials, supplies, vehicles
 or equipment through an existing public contract of
 another political subdivision within one (1) year of the
 opening of bids, provided certain conditions are met.
                         Piggybacking
                                  La. R.S. 38:321.1
Conditions:
 The original contract was bid in compliance with the public bid law.
 The total purchase on the contract does not exceed 2x what was purchased
    on the original contract.
   The public entity obtains the written consent of the entity which bid the
    original contract, as well as the contract number and resolution accepting
    the contract.
   The vendor agrees to the additional purchase.
   The vendor, product, materials, supplies, vehicles, or equipment are
    identical to those specified in the original contract, and
   Price is the same as the original contract price.
*A public entity may rely on the certificate of the Office of State Procurement or the political
subdivision who entered into the original contract that the contract was made in compliance
with the public bid law.
                   Piggybacking
 Political Subdivisions may still utilize the Local Services
  Law (La. R.S. 33:1324) to piggyback off of public contracts
  procured by other public entities. La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 17-
  0152
 Must do the following:
   Verify that the original contract was made in compliance with State
    law.
   Verify that the contract is still active, fresh, or viable.
   Obtain the written consent or approval of the public entity which bid
    the original contract, as well as the contract number and resolution
    accepting the contract.
   Confirm that the vendor and the product, services, materials, supplies
    or equipment are the same and that the price is the same or lower.
                       Piggybacking

           La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 15-0018

 A National Joint Powers Alliance (“NJPA”) contract is not a
  competitively bid contract…thus, piggy backing is not permitted.

 If an NJPA contract were adopted by the Office of State
  Procurement, it would become a “state contract” under the
  Procurement Code which would allow municipalities and
  parishes to purchase directly from the NJPA or a local vendor.
                Surplus Equipment

 Article VII, Section 14(E) authorizes the donation or
  exchange of surplus movable property between
  political subdivisions whose functions include public
  safety. This is a rare exception that does not require
  the receipt of fair market value in return for the
  equipment.
 Otherwise, the transfer may be done through a direct
  sale/cooperative endeavor/intergovernmental
  agreement where both entities receive equal value on
  each side of the transaction (appraisal).
      Cooperative Purchasing
Hospitals and Schools:

 Hospitals and schools are authorized to enter into agreements with one
  or more qualified group purchasing organizations for the
  purpose of obtaining bids for the purchase of materials or supplies.

 Hospitals -- Qualified group purchasing organization means an
  organization, for profit or not for profit, that has contracts for the sale of
  materials or supplies with at least 15 hospitals within the United States.

 Schools --     Qualified group purchasing organization means an
  organization, for profit or not for profit, of which at least 2 or more
  public school districts are members.
               Reverse Auctions
Definition:
 A competitive online solicitation process for materials, supplies, services,
  products, or equipment in which vendors compete against each other online
  in real time in an open and interactive environment.

Notice Requirements:
 Similar notice requirements


Policies and Procedures:
 May include vendor registration and prequalification
 Must designate an opening and a closing date
 Must continue to accept bids and allow bidders to lower their bids until the
  closing date
 Must not reveal bidders’ identities
 All bids shall be electronic and updated in real time
                    Emergencies
Emergency:
  An unforeseen mischance bringing with it destruction or injury of life
   or property or the imminent threat of such destruction or injury.
  An order by a judicial body to take any immediate action that
   requires construction or repairs absent compliance with the
   formalities of the public bid law, because of insufficient time to follow
   the advertising requirements.

Extreme Emergency:
   A catastrophic event that causes the loss of ability to obtain a quorum
    of the members necessary to certify the emergency prior to making
    the expenditure to acquire materials or supplies or to make repairs
    necessary for the protection of life, property, or continued function of
    the public entity.
                  Emergencies
Procedures:
 The emergency must be certified by the public entity at a public
  meeting.
 Notice of the emergency must published in the official journal
  within 10 days of declaring the emergency.
 Public Bid Law may be waived

Documentation:
 Every contract entered into under this provision shall be
  supported by written documentation (i.e., must evidence verbal
  offers with written confirmation).
              Procurement Code
What is the LA State Procurement Code?
 Must be followed by executive branch agencies when purchasing materials and
  supplies.
 Administered through the Office of State Procurement with a list of state-
  approved vendors.

What about local government?
 Local governments and political subdivisions may adopt by ordinance or
  resolution all or part of the procurement code.
 Any public entity may still purchase materials and supplies under the
  procurement code without formally adopting it.

Purchasing from a local vendor at the State contract price:
 May pay the costs for shipping, preparation, and delivery of the item, as long as
  these costs do not exceed the State contract price by:
        7% on purchases up to $10,000
        5% on purchases over $10,000 and up to $20,000
        3% on purchases over $20,000
     Data Processing and Telecommunications


 Public entities may lease, rent, or purchase
 telecommunications or data processing systems,
 including equipment and related services, through a
 Request for Proposal (RFP).
  Computers, phones, software, etc.

  The criteria must be set forth and point valued in the RFP.



 Public entities may still use the public bid law or
 purchase from State contract.
                     Homeland Security


 Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the
  contrary, any public procurement unit may procure
  materials, supplies, equipment, and services related
  to homeland security from federal General Services
  Administration (GSA) supply schedules.
 Such purchases shall:
  (1) Utilize a Louisiana distributor.

  (2) Use the competitive ordering procedures of the GSA.

  (3) Receive prior approval from the director of the GOHSEP,
   or his designee
              Bonds and Recordation

 Public works contracts of $5,000 or more must be in
 writing as per La. R.S. 38:2241 and 38:2216(A)(1).
  When   an emergency is declared, the threshold requiring the
   contract be in writing is $50,000.
 Public works contracts of $25,000 or more shall require a
 bond of not less than 50% of the contract price and must be
 recorded in the mortgage records in the parish where the
 work is to be done.
  Not later than thirty days after the work has begun

 A public entity may require the successful bidder of a
 materials and supplies contract to furnish a bond of not
 less than 50% for the faithful performance of his duties.
         Bonds and Recordation (cont.)

 Small businesses are only required to furnish one half
 of the bond amount as called or in the bid of public
 contracts of $200,000 or less. In order to qualify for
 this requirement the bidder shall have the following
 characteristics:
  Qualifies as a small business as certified by the Department of
   Economic Development and has been certified by the director
   of the Department of Economic Development;
  Is a responsible bidder (capable to provide goods and services
   in accordance with the terms of the contract, no documented
   record of arbitration or litigation where fault was found, etc.);
  Has been operating the same business for a continuous period
   of at least three years; and
  Has been denied guaranteed bond by the SBA or performance
   bond by and established security firm for reasons other than a
   previous history of performance default.
         Bonds and Recordation (cont.)

 On   public contracts of $50,000 or less, a
 performance bond can be waived by the public entity
 for a contractor or subcontractor who:
  Meets the definition of responsible bidder,
  Has  been operating as the same business for a continuous
   period of at least three years,
  Has been denied a performance bond by an established security
   firm, for reasons other than a previous history of performance
   default, and
  Provides an irrevocable letter of credit, property bond, or other
   authorized form of security that is acceptable to the public
   entity and is in an amount not less than the amount of the
   contract, for the faithful performance of his duties.
 The public entity may adopt rules and regulations to
 effectuate these provisions.
    The Exchange of Public Property between 2 Public
                       Entities

            La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 14-0005
 The exchange of public property between two public
  entities is authorized under the Local Services Law (La. R.S.
  33:1324) and does not have to be competitively bid.

 However….
   The transaction must comport with La. Const. art. VII, Section 14
    regarding the prohibited donation of public funds.
                    Local Hiring Preferences

                 La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 16-0020
 Public Bid Law does not permit a local hiring preference
 HireNOLA program established by city ordinance
 Under the ordinance, contractors and subcontractors were
  required to make a good faith effort to have a certain percentage
  of “work hours” performed by “local workers.”
   La. R.S. 38:2225(B) explicitly prohibits hiring preference as it relates to in-state
    workers.
   However, La. R.S. 38:2225(A) provides:
         If a nonresident contractor bidding on public work in the state of Louisiana is domiciled
          in a state that provides a percentage preference in favor of contractors domiciled in that
          state over Louisiana resident contractors for the same type of work, then every Louisiana
          resident contractor shall be granted the same preference over contractors domiciled in
          the other state favoring contractors domiciled therein whenever the nonresident
          contractor bids on public work in Louisiana.
PROHIBITIONS
       Division of Contracts
 Division or separation of any purchase to avoid
 the public bid law is illegal

  Ex. Buying 3 generators separately to avoid the $30,ooo threshold.

  Ex. Separating an attachment from a tractor.

  Purchases of like commodities during a fiscal year must be
   aggregated (La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 02-0122)
 Bids from Convicted Felons
 Public entities may reject the lowest bid from a business in which
  any individual with an ownership interest of at least 5% is a
  convicted felon for a crime committed in the solicitation or
  execution of a public contract.

 Responsibility is on the contractor. There is no duty on behalf of the
  public entity to perform background checks.

 The company whose bid was rejected shall be responsible to the
  public entity for the costs of rebidding, increased costs of awarding
  to the next highest bidder, or forfeiture of the bid bond.
 Compliance with Audit Law
 Public entities that have failed to comply with the Audit Law (La.
  R.S. 24:513) are prohibited from letting any public contracts that
  utilize state funds, whether through a direct appropriation or a
  transfer from another public entity.

 “State funds” includes any federal funds, including grants, that
  are passed through the state.

 Must receive written confirmation of compliance from the
  Legislative Audit Advisory Council (LAAC)
ENFORCEMENT
             Enforcement

            Two separate remedies:

 La. R.S. 38:2220


 La. R.S. 38:2220.1-2220.4
                  Enforcement

 (1) La. R.S. 38:2220 (Mostly for DAs and the AG)
   (1) District attorney in whose district the violation occurs
    the
   (2) Attorney general

   (3) Any interested party

 Nullify the contract or an Injunction
 If brought by the AG or DA:
   Court may award a civil penalty up to $50,000 against
    each offending member of the governing authority of the
    public entity who authorized the violation.
                  Enforcement

 (2) La. R.S. 38:2220.1-2220.4 (For private entities)
   Any person or entity with direct knowledge of an alleged
    violation of the public bid law may institute a civil action
    against the public entity to seek a declaration that such
    violation has occurred. The information upon which the
    action is based shall be obtained independently and shall
    NOT be based upon any of the following:
     (1) Criminal, civil, or administrative hearing
     (2) Governmental audit report or investigation
     (3) News media, unless person has independent knowledge of
      the alleged violation.
                   Enforcement
                              Process:
   Prior to initiation of the civil action, the complainant shall inform
    the attorney general and provide all direct information he
    possesses regarding the alleged violation.
     Complaint must be sent to the attorney general by certified mail
       within 15 days from the date of discovery.
   If the attorney general does not initiate a civil action within 30
    days, the complainant may initiate a civil action.
   The attorney general shall maintain the confidentiality of all
    information provided by the complainant.
 The winning party is entitled to attorney’s fees.
 If the court finds fraudulent conduct by the public
  entity, the plaintiff shall be awarded twice the amount
  of attorney’s fees.
                   Enforcement
 Airline Construction Co. v. Ascension
  Parish School Board (LA Supreme Court)
   A construction company challenged the bidding process regarding
    the award of a public works contract.
   Court said: An unsuccessful bidder must seek injunctive relief at a
    time when the alleged violation…
     (1) Was known or knowable and
     (2) when corrective action as a practical matter can be taken
      by the public body.
       Timeliness depends on several factors laid out by the court.


 Supreme Court ultimately held that an action filed 8
  months after the violation was untimely.
                      Summary
 Publicbid law applies to public entities when
 expending public funds on:
  (1) Public Works
  (2) Materials and Supplies
 Current threshold amounts are:
   Public Works: $250,000
   Materials and Supplies: $30,000
 The only documents a public entity may require
  bidders to submit prior to the opening of bids are
  those listed in La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(2) … Louisiana
  Uniform Bid Form
 Public bid law does not apply to professional services
          Recent Acts and New Opinions

 La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 20-00990
▪   La. Const. art. VII, §14(B) creates an exception to the
    prohibition against gratuitous alienation of property by a
    political subdivision by authorizing political subdivisions to
    donate the “use” of their public equipment and personnel
    upon the request of and pursuant to a written agreement
    with another political subdivision.
▪   This amendment is intended to avoid duplicative
    expenditures by taxpayers.
▪   The donation of use of the equipment and personnel may not
    be for general use but is permissible for a particular defined
    use, purpose, or activity. Compliance with La. R.S.
    33:4712.18 is required (time, employees, etc.)
          Recent Acts and New Opinions

 La. Atty. Gen. Op. No. 20-0118
▪ Legislature realized that extreme emergencies might require
    quicker solutions than bid law compliance could allow. The
    emergency exemption allows political subdivisions to enter
    into contracts for public works without having to go through
    a formal bid process.
▪   In order for a public entity to utilize the emergency
    provisions within La. R.S. 38:2212(P), the public entity must
    certify that an emergency exists and provide notice of the
    emergency to the public through its official journal within
    ten days of an emergency certification.
▪   Every contracted negotiated under the emergency authority
    must be supported by a written determination and findings
    justifying use of this authority.
 Act No. 288 of 2021 Procurement of Telecommunications or
 Video Surveillance Equipment or Services by State Agencies
               and Certain Educational Entities


 All public elementary, secondary, or postsecondary education
  schools, institutions, and governing authorities or nonpublic schools
  that receive state funds are prohibited from procuring
  telecommunications or video surveillance equipment produced by:

 Huawei Technologies Company,
 ZTE Corporation,
 Hyrtera Communications Corporation,
 Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology Company,
 Dahua Technology Company, or
 Any Subsidiaries of such companies.

 Also may not purchase equipment or services from an entity found
  to be owned, controlled or connected to the Chinese Government.
 Act No. 288 of 2021 Procurement of Telecommunications or Video
 Surveillance Equipment or Services by State Agencies and Certain
                        Educational Entities

 This prohibition extends to any product or equipment,
  regardless of manufacturer, containing component parts in
  any video surveillance or telecommunications equipment.

 It is extended to the following:
1) Computers or other equipment containing a component which
   enables any form of network connectivity or telecommunications
   regardless of whether the equipment is regularly connected to a
   network.
2) Building automation, environmental controls, access controls, or
   facility management and monitoring systems
3) Voting machines, elections systems
4) Any services provided using any equipment from the above.
                       Act 288

 Prior to the purchase of telecommunications or
 video surveillance equipment or services, the
 vendor must provide an affidavit that the
 equipment or services to be procured are not
 prohibited by La. R.S. 39:1753.1.

 No procurement can be made from a vendor or
 other entity who fails to provide the affidavit.
                      Acts 48 and 477

 Act No. 48-    Changes the provision in La. R.S. 37:2163(B) by
  removing the requirement that an agency may only provide
  proposal forms or specifications to a licensed contractor who
  holds an active license or his authorized representative. The
  provision now provides that proposal forms may not be issued later
  than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the hour and date set for
  receiving proposals. Generally, a project may not be awarded to
  contractors who do not hold an active contractor’s license; however,
  there are exceptions to this provision.

 Act No. 477- Established La. R.S. 51:2370.14. GUMBO (Granting
  Unserved Municipalities Broadband Opportunities) grants or awards
  are not subject to the provisions of the Louisiana Procurement Code
  or the Public Bid Law. This program is set up to provide broadband
  service to homes, businesses, educational facilities, healthcare
  facilities and community anchor points not currently served.
                        Act 272

 Provides for an exception to the Ethics prohibition
 preventing a spouse of a public servant who is
 employed by a person/business who is seeking a
 business or financial relationship with the agency of
 the public servant from remaining employed by that
 prohibited source. The exception details the specific
 requirements of not being an owner in the company,
 being employed for a year or longer prior to the date of
 the contract, their compensation being unaffected,
 public servant disqualifies themselves from
 participation in the transaction, and filing and reporting
 within ten business days of start of the contract.
                       Act 205

 Provides that public entities shall promptly pay all
 obligations including approved change orders and
 change orders shall be processed and issued by the
 public entity no later than forty (40) days following the
 final execution of the change order.

 This Act also requires that any timely change by a
 bidder to a the bid prior to submission of the bid shall
 be scratched through and initialed by the bidder or the
 person who submits the bid. The change as initialed
 shall be binding. For the purposes of bids submitted
 electronically, the last timely bid submission by each
 and any bidder shall be binding.
                       Act 205

 Requires a Notice of Acceptance be executed upon
 the recommendation of the design professional whose
 recommendation must be made within thirty calendar
 days after the date of completion or substantial
 completion of the public work.

 A public entity cannot take, use, or occupy the public
 work or us or occupy a specified area of the public
 work for which it as intended until the substantial
 completion has been filed, unless an approved
 agreement of partial occupancy is executed between
 the public entity, the design profession of record, and
 the contractor.
        Contact Information
Brett A Robinson
Assistant Attorney General
Post Office Box 94005
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70804
Robinsonbr@ag.Louisiana.gov
Phone: (225) 326-6083
