Office of School Choice
FAQ Public Bid Law

Charter school boards must follow public bid laws for contracts for the construction of public works.

School boards may purchase off a state contract since the Office of State Purchasing completed the public
bid process. Schools must submit questionnaires through the OSP website. Also, an emergency may alter
bid requirements. Schools should check La.R.S. 38.2211 for these alterations.

                                                                 Public Works
Erection, construction, alteration, improvement, or repair of any public facility or immovable property
owned, used, or leased by a public entity. Includes labor and materials.

Public Works
                                   ●​ If the contract exceeds $150,000, must bid and let for the contract with the
                                      lowest responsible bidder and include labor, materials, and equipment.
   Required                        ●​ While not required, the legislative auditor recommends that school boards use
                                      the RFP process and/or solicit at least 3 bids for public works greater than
                                      $25,000.
                                   ●​ Once a week, for 3 weeks, in a newspaper in the area, starting at least 25 days
                                      before the opening of bids (not starting on a weekend or legal holiday).
                                   ●​ Plans should be available to bidders on the first day of advertising and until 24
   Advertising RFP
                                      hours before the bidding date.
                                   ●​ Schools should use the uniform bid form established by the Department. Of
                                      Administration
                                   ●​ Includes a bid or security bond, acknowledgment of addenda, base bid,
   Bid
                                      alternates, bid total, signature, name of firm, and unit prices
   Requirements
                                   ●​ Submitted via certified mail or by hand
                                   ●​ Written confirmation of the accepted offer shall be part of the contract file
   Required
                                   ●​ Record of all elements of the public bid process shall be retained for at least
   Documentation
                                      six years following the purchase or completion of the public work
                                   ●​ To disqualify any bidder as not a “responsible bidder,” school boards must give
   Disqualification
                                      written notice to the bidder and the reasons for disqualification
   of Bidder
                                   ●​ Must allow the bidder to be heard at an informal hearing
                                   ●​ Bid: 5% Bid Bonds or other forms of bid security
   Bond
                                   ●​ Performance: Not less than 50% of the contract for public works contracts
   Requirements
                                      greater than or equal to $50,000
                                   ●​ 30 days upon conclusion or receiving bids to accept the lowest responsible
   Time Limit
                                      bidder, or reject all bids
                                   ●​ When any public work is accepted, the school board and bidder shall enter into
   Written Contract
                                      a written contract.
This informational document is a general guide to inform schools of basic requirements. It is NOT a substitute for federal, state guidelines and/or the
appropriate state and local policies. Please visit the websites above for more information or contact the Office of Portfolio with questions.



Louisiana Department of Education
doe.louisiana.gov | P.O. Box 94064 • Baton Rouge, LA • 70804-9064​                                                                            07/2025
