PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026




                               Public Bid Law
                               R.S. 38:2211, et seq.


                                    Overview

       This document discusses the general principles and guidelines concerning
Louisiana’s Public Bid Law using a frequently asked questions (FAQ) format. The FAQ also
contains Attorney General Opinions and case law to aid understanding of this area of the
law. While the document is fairly detailed, remember that every situation is unique and that
each situation deserves careful individual review.


       Note when working with federal contracts and FEMA reimbursements, the federal
government requires a competitive process for procurement of materials and supplies and
public works, particularly for FEMA disaster reimbursements. When considering
procurement after a disaster, always follow the stricter law to ensure a competitive process
and successful reimbursement.


       To facilitate your use of this document, numerous links within the summary will
direct your attention to related areas within the document and to documents posted on the
Louisiana Legislative Auditor’s website and on external websites. For example, under the
Table of Contents section, you may go directly to any area of the FAQ by clicking the title
of the section that you wish to view.




                                                                                Page 1 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026


                                         INDEX
I. Public Bid Law

Q.1.    What is the Public Bid Law?

Q.2.    Does the Public Bid Law apply to procurement by my public entity?

Q.3.    What types of contracts are covered by Louisiana’s Public Bid Law?


II. Public Works

Q.4.    What are public works?

Q.5.    Are contracts for routine maintenance considered public work contracts?

Q.6.    Are contracts for demolition considered public works?

Q.7.    What are the procedures for executing contracts for public works?

Q.8.    What is the dollar threshold, or contract limit (minimum), for contracts for
        public works?

Q.9.    When will the threshold, or contract limit, for Public Works resume annual
        changes?

Q.10. What items must be included to determine whether a public works contract
      must be bid?

Q.11. May a public entity construct a public work using its own employees without
      bidding?

Q.12. Is there a different contract limit for public works related to drainage projects to be
      done by regular maintenance employees of the St. Charles Parish governing
      authority?

        A. Design Phase

Q.13. Is a local public entity required to bid out a contract for design services (i.e.
      architect/engineer) for a public works project?

Q.14. What preparations must the public entity make before advertising for a public
      work?

Q.15.   What limitations apply to a consultant competing for contracts?




                                                                                Page 2 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

      B. Advertisement

Q.16. What are the requirements regarding the advertisement of bids for public works?

Q.17. May the advertisement for bids pre-qualify certain individuals and thereby
      disqualify others?

Q.18. What are addenda?

Q.19. What are the requirements for addenda?

Q.20. May a public entity require bidders attend a prebid conference?

Q.21. May the requirements of R.S. 38:2212 be waived?

      C. Bidding

Q.22. What documents must be included with a bid?

Q.23. How are bids delivered?

Q.24. What is electronic bidding?

Q.25. Who is exempt from the electronic bidding requirement under the Public Bid Law?

Q.26. When is the bid opening and what must occur?

Q.27. Can a public entity extend the time for submitting bids?

      D. Bid Selection

Q.28. May the public entity reject all bids?

Q.29. What is a responsible and responsive bidder?

Q.30. Who is a responsive bidder?

Q.31. What happens if a bidder is not a “responsible bidder”?

Q.32. Does the apparent low bidder who is disqualified as non-responsive/non-
      responsible have any recourse?

      D. Execution of Contract

Q.33. What is the time period for awarding public works contracts?

Q.34. May changes be made to the contract after the contract has been executed?




                                                                           Page 3 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

      E. Change Orders

Q.35. What is a change order?

Q.36. What is a change order that is within the scope of the contract?

Q.37. What is a change order that is outside the scope of the contract?

Q.38. What are the requirements for a change order?

      F. Miscellaneous

Q.39. What are recent definitions added to the public bid requirements for public
      works?

Q.40. May construction managers or other third party consultants employed by a public
      entity manage a construction project as a general contractor or act in the role of a
      general contractor?

Q.41. What is the A+B method to determine the lowest responsive bidder for public works
      contracts?

Q.42. Are there any special provisions for public works projects by local government
      entities that receive State funds and enter into contracts with third-party entities?

III. Materials and Supplies

Q.43. What are materials and supplies?


Q.44. Are all contracts for the purchase of materials and supplies subject to the Public
      Bid Law?

      A. Contract Limits

Q.45. What is the threshold, or contract limit (minimum) for purchases of materials and
      supplies by local political subdivisions?

Q.46. Does an exception to this threshold exist for purchase by a local
      governmental unit of a used or new motor vehicle for conversion into a law
      enforcement vehicle?

Q.47. May a public entity purchase a fleet of law enforcement vehicles without bidding if
      each vehicle is below the $70,000 threshold?

Q.48. What procedures exist for procurement of Materials and Supplies?




                                                                               Page 4 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

      B. Advertisement

Q.49. What requirements exist for the advertisement of bids?

Q.50. May a public entity specify alternates?

Q.51. May a public entity specify a particular brand?

      C. Bidding

Q.52. What is electronic bidding?

Q.53. Who is exempt from the electronic bidding requirement under the Public Bid Law?

Q.54. When is the bid opening and what must occur?

Q.55. What are the rules on the opening of bids?

      D. Bid Selection

Q.56. May the public entity reject all bids?

Q.57. What is a responsible and responsive bidder?

Q.58. What happens if a bidder is not a “responsible bidder”?

      E. Exceptions

Q.59. What are the exceptions to bidding requirements for contracts for materials and
      supplies?

Q.60. Does the Public Bid Law apply to a procurement transaction between two
      public entities?

             1. Piggybacking

Q.61. When may public entities piggyback on other public entities’ contracts under
      R.S. 38:321.1?

Q.62. With enactment of R.S. 38:321.1 can parishes, municipalities and political
      subdivisions still “piggyback” using the Local Services Law?

             2. Qualified Group Purchasing

Q.63. May hospitals engage in qualified group purchasing?

Q.64. May school districts and schools engage in qualified group purchasing?




                                                                          Page 5 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

Q.65. May public safety departments, such as municipal police departments and
      municipal and parish fire departments, engage in cooperative purchasing?

             3. Reverse Auctions


Q.66. May electronic bidding be used for “reverse auctions”?


Q.67. What are the notice requirements for a “reverse auction”?

             4. Other Exceptions

Q.68. How do political subdivisions procure computers and software?

Q.69. What are the rules for purchases from the federal government related to
      homeland security?

Q.70. What requirements exist for purchases made by a public safety agency spending
      federal grant dollars?

Q.71. Are there any exceptions that allow procurement without bidding of specialized
      cranes and replacement parts for port commissions and port, harbor, and terminal
      districts?

IV. Emergencies

Q.72. Are there exceptions to the Public Bid Law for emergencies?

      A. Emergency

Q.73. What is an emergency?

Q.74. When is the emergency exception applied?

Q.75. What special documentation is required for purchases under the emergency
      exception?

      B. Extreme Emergency

Q.76. What is an extreme emergency?

Q.77. How is the extreme emergency exception applied?

Q.78. What documentation is required for purchases under the extreme emergency
      exception?

V. Prohibitions



                                                                          Page 6 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

Q.79. May public entities who are not in compliance with the Audit Law let contracts for
      Public Works and Materials and Supplies?

Q.80. May public entities split public works projects or purchases of materials and
      supplies into several smaller projects/purchases to avoid the Public Bid Law?

Q.81. What provisions in the Public Bid Law address rejecting bids from convicted
      felons?

Q.82. May a commission, fee or other consideration be split or shared?

Q.83. May public entities disqualify a bidder if they are not registered with the Louisiana
      Secretary of State?

Q.84. May an entity trade in surplus equipment for credit as part of the purchase of new
      materials, supplies, or equipment?

Q.85. May a public entity disqualify a potential vendor that discriminates against firearm
      and ammunition industries?

VI. Professional Services

Q.86. How are professional services for executive branch entities defined?

Q.87. Are the professional services sought by local political subdivisions and other local
      entities subject to the Public Bid Law?

Q.88. Are other types of contracts for services subject to the Public Bid Law?

Q.89. What laws apply to other contracts by executive branch agencies?

Q.90. Are garbage contracts professional services contracts?

VII. Louisiana Procurement Code (LPC)

Q.91. What is the LPC?

Q.92. May a public entity that is subject to the Public Bid Law choose to be subject to the
      LPC?

Q.93. May a local governmental entity purchase an item on the state contract?

Q.94. May a local governmental entity purchase an item from a local vendor at the
      state bid price?

VIII. Retainage

Q.95. Is a public works contract required to contain a retainage fee?



                                                                               Page 7 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026




IX. Enforcement of Payments under Contract

Q.96. What actions may a contractor take to enforce payments by public entities
      which are due and payable under the public contract?

X. Telecommunications or Video Surveillance Equipment

Q.97. Are there any additional restrictions/requirements on the procurement of
      telecommunications or video surveillance equipment and services?

XI. CMAR

Q.98. What is CMAR and how can it be used?


XII. Procurement Training

Q.99. What annual training requirements are there for municipal elected officials and
      employees on the Public Bid Law?

XIII. Additional Legal Sources
Relevant Attorney General Opinions (Click Here)

XIV. Case Law

CASE LAW – (CLICK HERE)


XV. Additional Guidance (Flowcharts)




                                                                          Page 8 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026


                     Frequently Asked Questions
I. Public Bid Law                                                             R.S. 38:2211, et seq.


Q.1.   What is the Public Bid Law?

A.1.   The Public Bid Law is the set of laws that governs contracts for public works and the
       purchase of materials and supplies by public entities that meet certain threshold
       requirements called the “contract limit” (minimum). This limit is $60,000 for materials
       and supplies, and $260,000* for public works. The purpose of the public bid law is to
       ensure that public entities receive the best possible price when using public funds for the
       procurement of materials and supplies or public works. The Public Bid Law is a prohibitory
       law founded on public policy and therefore public entities must strictly comply with its
       provisions absent express exception in law.

       Procurement rules for state executive branch entities are contained in the Louisiana
       Procurement Code (LPC). State executive branch entities (the legislative and judicial
       branches are exempt) are required to use the LPC for the purchase of materials and
       supplies. They are, however, required to use the Public Bid Law for public works projects.

       Local governmental and political subdivisions are required to follow the Public Bid Law for
       the procurement of materials and supplies and public works projects. They may however,
       use the LPC for the procurement of materials and supplies when best interest dictates.
       They may choose by ordinance or resolution to adopt the LPC in part or in its entirety.
       They may also purchase from vendors that have been pre-approved by the Office of State
       Procurement (OSP). Purchasing off the state contract allows agencies to purchase items
       that have been pre-bid by OSP.

       *Effective February 1, 2026. See R.S. 38:2212(C)(1) and January 2026 Louisiana Register

Q.2.   Does the Public Bid Law apply to procurement by “my” public entity?

A.2.   “Public entity” is defined in R.S. 38:2211(A)(12) as the state of Louisiana, or any agency,
       board, commission, department, or public corporation of the state, created by the
       constitution or statute or pursuant thereto, or any political subdivision of the state, including
       but not limited to any political subdivision as defined in Article VI Section 44 of the
       Constitution of Louisiana, and any public housing authority, public school board, or any
       public officer whether or not an officer of a public corporation or political subdivision.

       All public entities are required to follow either the Public Bid Law or the Louisiana
       Procurement Code. Absent a specific exception, all public entities must follow the Public
       Bid Law for contracts related to public works. Political subdivisions and local governmental
       entities must use the Public Bid Law for the purchase of materials and supplies, unless
       they choose to follow the LPC or purchase goods off the state contract. State executive
       branch entities must use the LPC for the purchase of materials and supplies.




                                                                                          Page 9 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026



Q.3.   What types of contracts are covered by Louisiana’s Public Bid Law?

A.3.   For State Agencies, Boards and Commissions:

          ➢ All contracts for public works (defined in [Q.4]) are governed by the Public Bid Law.

          ➢ Contracts by State Agencies for professional services by architects, engineers,
            and landscape architects for projects estimated to cost greater than $1,000,000*
            are subject to the Public Bid Law. R.S. 38:2310, et seq. See [Q.86]

       For Local Entities:

          ➢ Contracts for the purchase of materials and supplies are governed by the Public
            Bid Law unless the political subdivision has elected to follow the State
            Procurement Code.

          ➢ All contracts for public works (defined in [Q.4] ) are governed by the Public Bid
            Law.

          ➢ Contracts for Printing Services, other than certain specialized printing, as defined
            in R.S. 38:2255 are required to comply with the same thresholds and bidding
            requirements as contracts for materials and supplies under R.S. 38:2212.1. See
            AG Op. No. 14-0217 for additional information on the requirements for printing
            service contracts under the Public Bid Law.

II. Public Works                                                          R.S. 38:2211


Q.4.   What are public works?

A.4.   Public work, as defined in R.S. 38:2211(A)(13), includes any contract for the erection,
       construction, alteration, improvement, or repair of any public facility or immovable
       property owned, used, or leased by a public entity. These contracts also include labor
       and materials.

Q.5.   Are contracts for routine maintenance considered public work contracts?

A.5.   Routine maintenance is specifically exempted from the definition of “public works” and
       contracts for routine maintenance are not required to be publicly bid unless the contract
       exceeds two years in duration. R.S. 38:2212(U) and (W)(1)

       The difference between routine maintenance and a “repair” (and therefore a public work)
       is a fact specific determination that is made on a case by case basis. Examples of routine
       maintenance are replacing shingles on a roof; preservative repainting of a building; and
       the preventative dredging of a port’s finger pier and docks. See, AG Op. No. 16-0082.

Q.6.   Are contracts for demolition considered public works?




                                                                                  Page 10 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

A.6.   There is not unanimous agreement as to the answer to this question, as noted below.
       However, public entities can ensure that their contracts for demolition are properly let by
       bidding them out through the Public Bid Law.

       The Attorney General (AG) in AG Op. No.10-0026 opined that a contract for demolition
       was not a public work as demolition was not included in the definition of a public work (i.e.
       erection, construction, alteration, improvement or repair), and therefore not subject to the
       provisions of the Public Bid Law. The AG stated that a contract for demolition should be
       treated as a contract for services. The AG has not formally withdrawn this opinion.

       In 2011, the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeal in Concrete Busters of Louisiana, Inc. v. The
       Board of Commissioners of the Port of New Orleans held that a contract for demolition
       was a public work, as demolition would result in an alteration of the immovable property
       of the public entity. Alteration is included within the definition of a public work. The
       Supreme Court and the other Appellate Courts have not issued a published opinion
       regarding the status of a contract for demolition being considered a public work. The
       Fourth Circuit’s decision, while persuasive, is not binding on public entities in other
       Louisiana Appellate Circuits.

       The Fourth Circuit’s decision in Concrete Busters was mentioned by the AG in
       AG Op. No. 12-0066, but was not fully addressed by the AG. In this opinion, the AG
       opinioned that, when a public entity elects to utilize the bid process to execute a contract
       for demolition, it must comply with the requirements set forth in its bid documents. The AG
       did not address whether a contract for demolition is a public work in AG Op. No. 12-0066,
       as the contract for demolition at question was valued below the contract threshold for a
       public works.

       Given these differing determinations, it is possible that another appellate court may
       ultimately hold that a public entity’s contract for demolition is not a public work, or may
       instead choose to adopt the reasoning of the Fourth Circuit and hold that it is a public
       work. Public entities should consult with their legal counsel to review these AG opinions
       and court decision to determine how it should proceed with any contract for demolition.

Q.7.   What are the procedures for executing contracts for public works?
                                                                       R.S. 38:2212(A)

A.7.   All contracts for public works exceeding the current contract threshold of $260,000* must
       be advertised for bid and let for contract with the lowest responsible and responsive bidder.

       The Legislative Auditor recommends that contracts for public works valued at $260,000*
       or less, be administered through a Request for Proposal (RFP) process and/or solicitation
       of at least three bids, even though the statute does not require them to be bid.

       *Effective February 1, 2026. See R.S. 38:2212(C)(1) and January 2026 Louisiana Register

       Public entities through their employees may undertake contracts for public works projects
       costing less than the contractual limit. All materials and supplies used in the construction
       must, however, be purchased in accordance with the Public Bid Law pursuant to
       R.S. 38:2212.1. AG Op. No. 04-0079                                         R.S. 38:2212(N)




                                                                                     Page 11 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

       All contracts for public works by public entities must use the Louisiana Uniform Public
       Work Bid Form established by the Office of Facility Planning and Control.
                                                                            R.S. 38:2212(B)(2)

       Any timely changes by a bidder to the bid prior to submission of the bid shall be scratched
       through and initialed by the bidder or the person who submits the bid. The change as
       initialed shall be binding.
                                                                               R.S. 38:2212(B)(2)

       For the purpose of bids submitted electronically, the last timely bid submission by each
       and any bidder shall be binding.
                                                                              R.S. 38:2212(E)(1)

       The Louisiana Uniform Public Work Bid Form is published in the Louisiana Administrative
       Code under Title 34, Government Contracts, Procurement and Property Control, Part III.
       Facility Planning and Control, Chapter 3.

                               Louisiana Uniform Public Work Bid Form.

Q.8.   What is the dollar threshold, or contract limit (minimum), for contracts for public
       works?

A.8.   The threshold, or contract limit, is currently set at $260,000*.

       *Effective February 1, 2026. See R.S. 38:2212(C)(1) and January 2026 Louisiana Register

       Changes in the 2014 Legislative Session, added an annual Consumer Price Index (CPI)
       calculation to the threshold. Act 111 of the 2020 Regular Session amended the contract
       limit to $250,000 and delayed any further CPI modifications until after February 1, 2025.
       The office of facility planning and control (OFPC) within the Division of Administration
       published an increase in contract limit based upon the CPI in the January 2026 Louisiana
       Register. The contract limit will increase to $260,000, effective February 1, 2026.


Q.9.   When will the threshold, or contract limit, for Public Works resume annual
       changes?                                                     R.S. 38:2212(C)

A.9.   In February 2025, the Office of Facility Planning and Control (OFPC) was required to
       resume annually adjusting the contract limit for public works by an amount not to exceed
       the previous year’s increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The CPI is commonly
       used when it is necessary to adjust prices or costs to account for the effect of inflation on
       the real value of various costs.

       The office of facility planning and control (OFPC) within the Division of Administration
       published an increase in contract limit based upon the CPI in the January 2026 Louisiana
       Register. The contract limit will increase to $260,000, effective February 1, 2026.


Q.10. What items must be included to determine whether a public works contract
      must be bid?




                                                                                     Page 12 of 65
       PUBLIC BID LAW
       REVISED 02/2026

       A.10.   R.S. 38:2212(C)(1) provides that the following shall be included:
          •    Labor;
          •    Materials;
          •    Equipment, as per rates in the latest edition of the Associated Equipment Dealers Rental
               Rate book; and
          •    Administrative overhead, not to exceed fifteen percent.


       Q.11. May a public entity construct a public work using its own employees without
             bidding?                                                    R.S. 38:2212(N)

       A.11. Public works that are estimated to cost less than the contract limit may be undertaken by
             the public entity with its own employees. Any materials or supplies purchased in
             connection with the project must be procured in accordance with R.S. 38:2212.1. (See,
             AG Op. No. 04-0079) Those contracts let by any public entity for public works estimated
             to cost more than the contract limit shall be advertised and let by contract to the lowest
             responsible and responsive bidder.

       Q.12. Is there a different contract limit for public works related to drainage projects to be
             done by regular maintenance employees of the St. Charles Parish governing
             authority?                                                           R.S. 38:2212(C)(4)

       A.12.    The Legislature, through Act 201 of the 2019 Regular Session enacted
               R.S. 38:2212(C)(4), which created an exception to the general contract limit for public
               works related to drainage projects to be done by regular maintenance employees of the
               St. Charles Parish governing authority. For such Public Works projects, the contract limit
               is $250,000 per project, including labor, materials, and equipment, with administrative
               overhead not to exceed 15%. This provision terminated on December 31, 2020.

               Act 111 of the 2020 Regular Session (effective July 1, 2020) subsequently increased
               the general contract limit for public works contracts to $250,000. As the specific provision
               for St Charles Parish has now terminated, the general public works contract limit of
               $260,000* now applies.

               *Effective February 1, 2026. See R.S. 38:2212(C)(1) and January 2026 Louisiana Register


               A. Design Phase

       Q.13. Is a local public entity required to bid out a contract for design services
             (i.e. architect/engineer) for a public works project?

       A.13. No. Contracts for design services by a local public entity are not required to be bid.

               In addition, R.S. 38:2318.1* requires that public entities select providers of design services
NEW
               on a basis of competence and qualifications for a fair and reasonable price. Public
2025           entities, or persons they contract through, are prohibited under R.S. 38:2318.1 from
               selecting providers of design services where price or price-related information is a factor
               in selecting an architect, engineer, or other design professional for public works projects




                                                                                              Page 13 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

        using State or local funding. Therefore, price should not be utilized to evaluate or rank the
        qualifications of potential providers of design services.

        Public entities, or persons that they contract through, should utilize a Request For
        Qualifications (RFQ) process to seek and select the most qualified provider of design
        services. Once this determination has been made, the public entity may then attempt to
        negotiate a price with the provider selected as most qualified. If the public entity is unable
        to come to terms and execute a contract with the firm/design professional that is ranked
        most qualified based on the established criteria under the RFQ, the public entity may then
        begin negotiations with the next rated/qualified firm until it can come to terms with and
        execute a contract. See R.S. 38:2318.1(B)

        * As amended by Act 190 of the 2025 Regular Session (eff. August 1, 2025).

Q.14. What preparations must the public entity make before advertising for a public
      work?                                                         R.S. 38:2212(H)

A.14. Every public entity intending to advertise a public work for bids is required to estimate the
      probable construction costs of such public work or obtain an estimate from the project
      designer prior to advertising the public work for bids.

        No public entity shall advertise a public work for bids unless the public entity has
        budgeted funds that meet or exceed the estimate of the probable construction costs for
        the project.

        The estimate of probable construction costs for the project shall be made available at the
        time of bid opening, either by posting the estimate electronically or announcing aloud
        the estimate at the bid opening.

        Any and all bidders' information shall be available upon request, either no sooner than
        nine working days* following the bid opening or after the recommendation of award by the
        public entity or the design professional, whichever occurs first. The requester shall pay
        reasonable reproduction costs.

        These requirements shall not apply to the Department of Transportation and
        Development.

Q.15.   What limitations apply to a consultant competing for contracts?
                                                                                     R.S. 38:2212.7

A.15. R.S. 38:2212.7 provides limitations on consultants competing for contracts. Any person
      contracting with an agency for the purposes of developing bidding documents, requests
      for proposals, or any other type of solicitation related to a specific procurement shall be
      prohibited from bidding, proposing, or otherwise competing for award of that
      procurement. Such persons shall further be prohibited from participating as
      subcontractors related to the award of that procurement.

        The statute further notes, however, that certain activities are not considered to be
        “developing bidding documents, requests for proposals, or any other type of
        solicitation” and would therefore not prevent a consultant from competing.



                                                                                       Page 14 of 65
       PUBLIC BID LAW
       REVISED 02/2026


                     These activities are:

                     (1) Architectural and engineering programming.
                     (2) Master planning.
                     (3) Budgeting.
                     (4) Feasibility analysis.
                     (5) Constructability review.
                     (6) Furnishing specification data or other product information.
                     (7) Any other services that do not establish selection qualifications or evaluation
                         criteria for the procurement of an architect or engineer.

              B. Advertisement

       Q.16. What are the requirements regarding the advertisement of bids for public works?
                                                                                  R.S. 38:2212

       A.16. All advertisements for contracts for public works exceeding the contract limit for public
             works contracts (currently greater than $260,000*), unless an exception applies, shall
             be published once a week for 3 different weeks in a newspaper in the locality; the first
             advertisement shall appear at least 25 days before the opening of bids and not occur on
             a Saturday, Sunday, or other legal holiday R.S. 38:2212(G).

              *Effective February 1, 2026. See R.S. 38:2212(C)(1) and January 2026 Louisiana Register


                 ➢   Although the word ‘locality’ is not defined, the AG has interpreted it to mean the
                     area where the political subdivision is located AG Op. No. 83-0720.

                         ➢ Contracts by a public entity for any project to restore or rehabilitate a levee
                           that is not maintained with federal funds nor undertaken by the public
                           entity with its own resources and employees must be advertised for bid if
                           they exceed $1.5 million dollars. Additionally, public entities utilizing this
                           provision shall annually submit reports to the Joint Committee on
                           Transportation, Highways and Public Works. This exception for a
                           heightened contract limit is slated to expire on June 30, 2036*
                           R.S. 38:2212(C)(3).
NEW
2025                 * As amended by Act 117 of the 2025 Regular Session (eff. August 1, 2025)

                 ➢ Bidding documents shall be available to bidders on the day of the first
                   advertisement and until 24 hours before the bid opening date R.S. 38:2212(G)(2).

                 ➢ Contractor certification - R.S. 37:2165* provides that all architects, engineers, and
                   awarding authorities shall place in their bid specifications the requirement that a
                   contractor shall certify that he holds an active license by displaying his license
                   number on the bid envelope. In the case of an electronic bid proposal, a contractor
                   may submit an authentic digital signature on the electronic bid proposal
                   accompanied by the contractor's license number in order to meet the requirements
                   of this Paragraph. If the bid does not display the contractor’s license number the



                                                                                           Page 15 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

               bid shall be automatically rejected, the bid shall be returned to the bidder marked
               “Rejected,” and shall not be read aloud. Any bid that does not require the contractor
               to hold an active license shall state the exemption on the bid envelope and shall
               be treated as a lawful bid. Where bids are to be received or forms furnished by the
               the awarding authority, no proposal forms or specifications shall be issued to
               anyone except a licensed contractor who holds an active license or his authorized
               representative.

               * As amended by Act 422 of the 2025 Regular Session (eff. August 1, 2025).

           ➢ Public entities must include all bid documents as defined in R.S. 38:2211(A)(2), on
             the electronic website accepting the electronic bids R.S. 38:2212(E)(7).

           ➢ When attendance by bidders is mandated at a pre-bid conference, the date, place,
             and time of the pre-bid conference shall be stated in the first advertisement
             R.S. 38:2212(I).

           ➢ If at the end of the contract document phase, it is determined that the designer’s
             estimate is more than the funds budgeted by the public entity for the project, the
             project shall not be advertised for bid. The designer’s estimate shall be read aloud
             upon opening bids R.S. 38:2212(H).

           ➢ The Construction or Contract Document Phase is the coordination of all technical
             drawings and designs related to the project, the development of the specifications’
             documents, finalization of details, and an updated statement of probable cost.

           ➢ If political subdivisions are required to, allowed to, or elect to allow for electronic
             submission of bids, the advertisement shall contain the electronic address of the
             public entity and shall establish the specific times for public access to the electronic
             interactive environment for purposes of submission of bids R.S. 38:2212(E).

Please note: Use of the electronic bidding option through services such as Central Bidding does
not eliminate the newspaper advertising requirements of R.S. 38:2212(G).


Q.17. May the advertisement for bids pre-qualify certain individuals and thereby
      disqualify others?                                             R.S. 38:2215

A.17. No, the general rule is that no pre-qualification may occur. For instance, geographic
      restrictions limiting the distance between the vendor and the public entity are not allowed.
      However, the entity may specify a time limit for needed repairs if included in the contract.

       There are a very few exceptions to the general rule. An example of an exception under
       R.S. 38:2212.5 is that contracts for historic restoration for projects other than bridges and
       roads may be pre-qualified, due to the specific skills needed for the job.

       Although public entities may not generally pre-qualify bidders, the public entity may still
       consider any issues that might otherwise prevent a bidder from providing the requested
       work or materials or suppliers when reviewing whether the bidder is responsive and




                                                                                      Page 16 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

       responsible. Any disqualification under this review shall comply with the due process
       outlined in R.S. 38:2212(X).

Q.18. What are addenda?

A.18. Addenda are used to make changes to the bid documents -- often to extend the bid
      period. As with change orders, addenda must be within the scope of the project.

Q.19. What are the requirements for addenda?

A.19. The bid period may be extended up to 30 days through the issuance of an addendum
      without the requirement of re-advertising.

       If, however, the addendum is issued within 72 hours of the advertised time of opening
       bids, the opening of bids must be extended for at least 7 but not more than 21 working
       days without the requirement of re-advertising. The addendum shall state the revised time
       and date of opening of bids.

       If an addendum modifying plans and specifications is issued within 7 days prior to the
       advertised time for opening bids, the public entity shall transmit -- within 24 hours of the
       issuance of the addendum -- a copy of the addendum to all prime bidders who have
       requested bid documents by one of the following methods:

              (1) Facsimile transmission;
              (2) E-mail; or
              (3) Hand-delivery.

Q.20. May a public entity require bidders attend a pre-bid conference?
                                                                                  R.S. 38:2212(I)

A.20. Yes. Public Entities may mandate that prospective bidders on a public works contract
      attend a pre-bid conference. The public entity shall include notice of this mandate in its
      advertisement along with the date, time, and location of the pre-bid conference.

       Prospective bidders must remain in attendance for the duration of the conference.

       Prospective bidders who fail to attend the conference or remain for the duration shall be
       prohibited from submitting a bid for the project.

Q.21. May the requirements of R.S. 38:2212 be waived?                            R.S. 38:2212(B)

A.21. Public entities may not waive the requirements of R.S. 38:2212.

       If a public entity adds any additional requirements for information, unless mandated by
       State or Federal requirements, the requirements shall be void and not considered in the
       award of the contract. See R.S. 38:2212(B)(2)

       C. Bidding

Q.22. What documents must be included with a bid?                             R.S. 38:2212(B)(2)



                                                                                    Page 17 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026


A.22. R.S. 38:2212(B)(2) provides that the “bidding documents” shall require only the following
      to be submitted by a bidder on a public works project:

   •   Completed Louisiana Uniform Bid Form;
   •   Bid Security or Bid Bond;
   •   Acknowledgment of Addenda;
   •   Base Bid;
   •   Alternates;
   •   Signature of Bidder,
   •   Name, Title, and Address of Bidder;
   •   Name of Firm or Joint Venture;
   •   Corporate Resolution or written evidence of the authority of the person signing the bid;
       and
   •   Louisiana Contractor’s License Number (must also be on the envelope)

   If a public entity adds any additional requirements for information, unless mandated by State
   or Federal requirements, the requirements shall be void and not considered in the award of
   the contract. See R.S. 38:2212(B)(2)

Q.23. How are bids delivered?                                                    R.S. 38:2212(B)(6)

A.23. Bids may be delivered one of three ways.

       (1) For bids hand delivered by the bidder or his agent, a written receipt shall be
           handed to the deliverer;
       (2) Alternatively, bids shall be sent by registered or certified mail with a return receipt
           requested; or
       (3) Shall be submitted electronically.

       The new law removes the stipulation that the requirement that all bids be sent by
       registered or certified mail shall not apply to bids received by municipal and parochial
       governing authorities. The current presumption is that these alternative requirements do
       apply to municipal and parochial governing authorities.

       No public entity shall accept or take any bids, including receiving any hand delivered
       bids, on days that are recognized as holidays by the United States Postal Service.


Q.24. What is electronic bidding?                       R.S. 38:2212(E) and R.S. 38:2212.1(B)(4)

A.24. Public entities shall provide, as an additional bidding option, a uniform and secure
      electronic interactive system for the submittal of bids for public contracts, both public works
      and materials and supplies, requiring competitive bidding. Any public entity, (including
      local entities) providing an electronic system shall follow the standards for the receipt of
      electronic bids adopted by the office of the governor, division of administration, and the
      office of information technology (See LAC 4:XV.701 (pg 177 of document), providing that
      any special condition or requirement for the submission shall be specified in the
      advertisement for bids).




                                                                                       Page 18 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

       Please note: Use of the electronic bidding option through services such as Central Bidding
       does not eliminate the newspaper advertising requirements of R.S. 38:2212(G) for public
       works (See, Q.16) or R.S.38:2212.1(B)(1) for materials and supplies (See, Q.48).

Q.25. Who is exempt from the electronic bidding requirement under the Public Bid Law?

A.25. The exemptions from requiring public entities to accept electronic bid submission for
      public works provided by R.S. 38:2212(E) include:

   •   Public entities that are currently without available high-speed Internet access until high-
       speed Internet access becomes available;

   •   Any parish with a police jury form of government and a population of less than twenty
       thousand;

   •   Any city or municipality with a population of less than ten thousand; and,
   •   Any other public entity that is unable to comply with the law without securing and
       expending additional funding; and

       Public entities have the option to require that all bids be submitted electronically for any
       competitive bid let out for public bid.

       Public entities shall include all bidding documents as defined in R.S. 38:2211(A)(2), on the
       electronic website accepting the electronic bids.

Q.26. When is the bid opening and what must occur?                                 R.S. 38:2214

A.26. The Bid opening shall be held at the date, time, and location noticed in the public
      entity’s advertisement. The bid opening shall be at least 25 days after the first
      published advertisement.

       At the bid opening, the public entity shall publicly open the submitted bids and read
       them aloud.

Q.27. Can a public entity extend the time for submitting bids?

A.27. Yes. A public entity may through the issuance of addendum extend the bid period
      for up to thirty (30) days, without requiring re-advertisement.

       If the addendum is issued within 72 hours of the advertised time of opening bids, the
       opening of bids must be extended for at least 7 but not more than 21 working days without
       the requirement of re-advertising. The addendum shall state the revised time and date of
       opening of bids. See [Q.19.]

       Notice should be given to ensure that all potential bidders are aware of the extension.

       D. Bid Selection

Q.28. May the public entity reject all bids?                                        R.S. 38:2214




                                                                                    Page 19 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

A.28. R.S. 38:2214(B) provides that the public entity may reject for just cause all bids. The
      statute does not define “just cause” for materials and supplies, but does define “just
      cause” for public works, including but not limited to:
   ➢ The public entity's unavailability of funds sufficient for the construction of the
      proposed public work;

   ➢ The failure of any bidder to submit a bid within an established threshold of the
     preconstruction estimates for that public work, as part of the bid specifications;

   ➢ A substantial change by the public entity prior to the award in the scope or design
     of the proposed public work;

   ➢ A determination by the public entity not to build the proposed public work within
     twelve months of the date for the public opening and reading of bids; and

   ➢ The disqualification by the public entity of all bidders.

Q.29. What is a responsible and responsive bidder?

A.29. A responsible and responsive bidder, according to R.S. 38:2212(A)(1), is one whose
      bid meets the requirements set out in the advertised bidding documents and who
      provides the required documentation within ten days of the bid opening. These
      documents may be required by statute, the Administrative Code, or the bidding
      documents.
          ➢ Contractor certification - R.S. 37:2165 provides that all architects, engineers,
             and awarding authorities shall place in their bid specifications the requirement that
             a contractor shall certify that he holds an active license by displaying his license
             number on the bid envelope. In the case of an electronic bid proposal, a contractor
             may submit an authentic digital signature on the electronic bid proposal
             accompanied by the contractor's license number in order to meet the requirements
             of this Paragraph. If the bid does not display the contractor’s license number the
             bid shall be automatically rejected, the bid shall be returned to the bidder marked
             “Rejected,” and shall not be read aloud. Any bid that does not require the contractor
             to hold an active license shall state the exemption on the bid envelope and shall
             be treated as a lawful bid.

       The low bidder is required to furnish any other documentation, including the attestation
       required under R.S. 38:2212.10, within ten days of the bid opening. The governing
       authority of any publicly owned commercial aviation airport to the Sewerage and Water
       Board of New Orleans and all agencies of the City of New Orleans including the Regional
       Transit Authority and the New Orleans Aviation Board are required to have the two lowest
       bidders furnish any other required documentation and attestations three days after the bid
       opening.

Q.30. Who is a responsive bidder?                                            R.S. 38:2212(A)(3)

A.30. R.S. 38:2212 adds the word “responsive” to the phrase “responsible bidder” to
      provide as follows:




                                                                                   Page 20 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

       All public work exceeding the contract limit as defined in this Section, including labor and
       materials, to be done by a public entity shall be advertised and let by contract to the
       lowest responsible and responsive bidder who had bid according to the bidding
       documents as advertised, and no such public work shall be done except as provided in
       this Part.

       The law does not define “responsive bidder” but a reading of the law as to what constitutes
       a non-responsive bidder demonstrates that a responsive bidder is the apparent low bidder
       who submits the proper documentation within ten days of the opening of the bids.

       The law provides that the bidding documents shall not require any bidder, other than the
       apparent low bidder, to furnish any other information or documentation, including the
       Attestation Affidavit and the E–Verification Form, any sooner than ten days after the date
       bids are opened; however, the apparent low bidder may submit such information or
       documentation at any time prior to the expiration of the ten-day period.
       If the apparent low bidder does not submit the proper information or documentation as
       required by the bidding documents within the ten-day period, the law states that such
       bidder shall be declared non-responsive, and the public entity may award the bid to the
       next lowest bidder, and afford the next lowest bidder not less than ten days from the date
       the apparent low bidder is declared non-responsive, to submit the proper information and
       documentation as required by the bidding documents, and may continue such process
       until the public entity either determines the low bidder or rejects all bids.

       Therefore, by deduction, a responsive bidder is the apparent low bidder who submits the
       proper documentation within ten days of the opening of the bids.

Q.31. What happens if a bidder is not a “responsible bidder”?                    R.S. 38:2212(X)

A.31. If the public entity letting the contract proposes to disqualify any bidder, either as a
      potential bidder or as the low bidder, on grounds that such bidder is not a “responsible
      bidder” the public entity shall:

     ➢ Give written notice of the proposed action to the bidder and include in the written notice
       all reasons for the proposed action;

     ➢ Give the bidder who is proposed to be disqualified the opportunity to be heard at an
       informal hearing at which the bidder is afforded the opportunity to refute the reasons
       for the proposed action.

              ▪ The informal hearing shall be conducted prior to award of the public work.

              ▪ The informal hearing shall be a condition precedent to any action by the bidder
                adverse to the public entity, its representatives, employees, and designers.

              ▪ The informal hearing shall be conducted by the public entity not later than five
                business days after the date of the notice of disqualification of the bidder. The
                public entity shall issue a ruling in writing and deliver it to the affected bidder
                not later than five business days after the date of the informal hearing.




                                                                                    Page 21 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

               ▪ No award of the contract for the public work shall be made by the public entity
                 prior to the expiration of at least five working days following the date of
                 issuance of the decision by the hearing official.

        The disqualified vendor has the right to seek redress in a court of law after exhausting
        administrative remedies.

        These provisions do not apply to the Department of Transportation and Development.

Q.32. Does the apparent low bidder who is disqualified as non-responsive/non-
      responsible have any recourse?                                R.S. 38:2212(X)

A.32. If the public entity letting the contract proposes to disqualify any bidder, either as a
      potential bidder or as the low bidder, on grounds that such bidder is not a "responsible
      bidder" such public entity shall do all of the following:

        (a) Give written notice of the proposed action to such bidder and include in the written
            notice all reasons for the proposed action.

        (b) Give the bidder who is proposed to be disqualified the opportunity to be heard at an
            informal hearing at which such bidder is afforded the opportunity to refute the
            reasons for the proposed action.

   ➢ The informal hearing shall be conducted prior to award of the public work.
   ➢ The informal hearing shall be a condition precedent to any action by the bidder adverse
     to the public entity, its representatives, employees, and designers.

   ➢ The informal hearing shall be conducted by the public entity not later than five business
     days after the date of the notice of disqualification of such bidder. The public entity shall
     issue a ruling in writing and deliver it to the affected bidder not later than five business
     days after the date of the informal hearing.

   ➢ No award of the contract for the public work shall be made by the public entity prior to the
     expiration of at least five working days following the date of issuance of the decision by
     the hearing official.

   ➢ The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to such actions of the Department of
     Transportation and Development.

   ➢ Although not mentioned in the statute, once a disqualified vendor has exhausted all
     administrative remedies, that vendor may seek an injunction or further action in the district
     court.

        D. Execution of Contract

Q.33.   What is the time period for awarding public works contracts?
                                                                                   R.S. 38:2215

A.33. R.S. 38:2215 provides that a public entity shall act not later than forty-five calendar days
      after the date of opening bids to award the public works contract to the lowest



                                                                                     Page 22 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

      responsible and responsive bidder or to reject all bids. If, however, the public entity and
      the lowest responsible and responsive bidder agree by mutually written consent, the
      deadline for award may be extended in increments of thirty calendar days.

      If the lowest responsible and responsive bidder has timely provided all documents
      required by R.S. 38:2212, and no injunction or temporary restraining order is in effect,
      the lowest responsible and responsive bidder and the public entity shall execute the
      contract not later than sixty calendar days after the date of the public entity's award of
      the contract to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder.

      The public entity shall issue to the contractor a notice to proceed with the project or work
      order not later than thirty calendar days following the date of the second party’s
      execution of the contract t. However, the public entity and the contractor, upon mutual
      written consent of both parties, may agree to extend the deadline to issue the notice to
      proceed.

      The provisions of this law do not apply to contracts to be financed by bonds that are
      required to be sold after opening of bids on the contract, or when the contract is to be
      financed in whole or in part by federal or other funds that will not be readily available at
      the time bids are opened, or on contracts that require a poll of the Legislature of
      Louisiana before funds are available to fund the contract. This exception shall be
      mentioned in the bidding documents for the project and in the official advertisement for
      bids required in accordance with R.S. 38:2212.

      These provisions are not subject to waiver.

Q.34. May changes be made to the contract after the contract has been executed?
                                                                       R.S. 38:2212(M)

A.34. Yes, the contract may be amended through change orders, if they are within the scope
      of the contract.

   ➢ All public work contracts shall contain provisions authorizing the issuance of change
     orders within the scope of the contract.

   ➢ All change orders shall be in writing or in electronic format if the public entity is capable of
     receiving change orders electronically. All change orders shall be signed by the contractor
     and the public entity or its design representative.

   ➢ The public entity shall pay the contractor for work performed by change order not later
     than sixty days after the date the public entity approves the application for payment for
     completion of the work performed in the change order.

   ➢ Any change order outside the scope of the contract shall be let out for public bid if it
     exceeds the contract threshold defined herein.

   ➢ Any change order pertaining to public work, not required to be let out for public bid, shall
     either be negotiated in the best interest of the public entity or let out for public bid. Where
     the change order is negotiated, the public entity shall require that such change order be
     fully documented and itemized as to costs, including material quantities, material costs,
     equipment used, labor, taxes, insurance, employee benefits, other related costs, profit,


                                                                                      Page 23 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

       and overhead. If certain unit prices are contained in the initial contract, no deviations shall
       be allowed in computing negotiated change order costs.

   ➢ Where certain unit prices are contained in the initial contract, no deviations shall be
     allowed in computing the negotiated change order costs unless specified in contract
     documents. See R.S. 38:2212(M)(5)(a)

       E. Change Orders

Q.35. What is a change order?                                                   R.S. 38:2211(A)(3)

A.35. A change order is any contract modification that includes an alteration, deviation,
      addition, or omission as to a preexisting public work contract that authorizes an
      adjustment in the contract price, contract time, or an addition, deletion, or revision of
      work. Change orders may be either “within the scope of the contract” or “outside the
      scope of the contract.”

Q.36. What is a change order that is within the scope of the contract?
                                                                     R.S. 38:2211(A)(3)(c)

A.36. A change order is within the scope of the contract when it does not alter the nature of the
      thing to be constructed and that is an integral part of the project objective.

Q.37. What is a change order that is outside the scope of the contract?
                                                                    R.S. 38:2211(A)(3)(b)

A.37. A change order is outside the scope of the contract when it alters the nature of the thing
      to be constructed or that is not an integral part of the project objective
      (See the AG Opinion discussed in [Q.38]

Q.38. What are the requirements for a change order?                               R.S.38:2212(M)
                                                                                     R.S. 38:2222

A.38. All change orders shall be in writing or in electronic format if the public entity is able to
      receive change orders electronically. All change orders shall be signed by the contractor
      and the public entity or its design representative.

       The public entity shall pay the contractor for work performed by change order not later
       than sixty days after the date the public entity approves the application for payment for
       completion of the work performed in the change order.

           ➢ Change orders within the scope of the contract may be negotiated in the public's
             best interest or let out for bid. Public entities may wish to consider letting out for
             bid change orders within the scope which are more than the contract limit as a best
             use of public funds.

           ➢ Change orders outside of the scope of the contract that exceed the contract limit
             must be let for bid.




                                                                                       Page 24 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

        ➢ The AG has opined that any additional public work outside of the scope of the
          existing contract that is below the contract limit should be negotiated or let out for
          public bid rather than by change order to the existing contract.
          See AG Op. No. 03-0263

        ➢ Change Orders which require new pricing or a change in unit pricing shall be
          submitted to the designer or record or in the absence of the designer, the public
          entity, within 30 days from the date of discovery of the work to be performed by the
          change order. See R.S. 38:2212(M)(5)(a) & (b)

        ➢ For any change order requiring redesign, the redesign shall not take more than
          ninety days from the date of notification by the contractor to the designer of record,
          or in their absence the public entity, of the discovery of work to be performed by
          the change order. The public entity may grant extensions of time if necessary.
          Upon completion of the redesign, the contractor shall submit the cost estimate to
          the designer of record, or in their absence the public entity, within thirty days for
          the redesigned work under the change order. See R.S. 38:2212(M)(5)(c)

        ➢ For any change order, a public entity shall have forty-five days from the submittal
          of the changer order to the public entity, to negotiate, and approve or reject the
          contractor’s proposed cost estimate of the work to be performed by the change
          order. Extensions of time may be granted by mutual agreement or shall be granted
          as necessary for the public entity to obtain governmental approval.
          See R.S. 38:2212(M)(5)(d)

        ➢ Except where a public work does not exceed the contract limit under R.S. 38:2212,
          the provisions of R.S. 38:2212(M) in regard to change orders shall not be waived
          by contract. See R.S. 39:2212(M)(5)(e)

        ➢ R.S. 38:2222(A) requires that each change order shall be recorded by the public
          entity which entered into the contract in the office of the recorder of mortgages in
          the parish where the work is to be done or if not a public work, where the entity is
          domiciled, not later than 30 days after the date of the change order which requires
          that the recordation take place. The requirement applies to:

            o Change order to a public works contract or to a contract for materials and
              supplies that adds an amount of 10% or more of the original contract amount,
              if the additional amount is at least $10,000 or

            o All change orders to a contract aggregating to an amount of 20% or more of
              the original contract amount if the additional amount is at least $10,000.

            o The original contract, if not previously recorded, shall be recorded with the
              change order.

        ➢ The requirements of R.S. 38:2222(A) do not apply to the office of facility planning
          and control and the office of state purchasing.




                                                                                 Page 25 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

           ➢ R.S. 38:2222(B), requires that change orders shall be processed and issued by
             the public entity no later than forty (40) days following final execution of the change
             order.

       F. Miscellaneous

Q.39. What are recent definitions added to the public bid requirements for public works?

A.39. Recent additions to the definitions section in R.S. 38:2211, include:

           ➢ “Alternate” means an item on the bid form that may either increase or decrease
             the quantity of work or change the type of work within the scope of the project,
             material, or equipment specified in the bidding documents, or both.

           ➢ “Change order” means any contract modification that includes an alteration,
             deviation, addition, or omission as to a preexisting public work contract, which
             authorizes an adjustment in the contract price, contract time, or an addition,
             deletion, or revision of work.

           ➢ “Probable construction costs” means the estimate for the cost of the project as
             designed that is determined by the public entity or the designer.

           ➢ “Working days” for the purposes of this Part (Public Bid Law), means the days
             Monday through Friday, excluding recognized holidays and declared emergencies.

Q.40. May construction managers or other third party consultants employed by a public
      entity manage a construction project as the general contractor or act in the role of
      a general contractor?                                             R.S. 38:2212(L)

A.40. No, the practice of using construction managers to oversee, direct, or otherwise perform
      the role of a general contractor on a public works project is prohibited
      AG Op. No. 12-0232. This restriction shall not apply to the initial construction of a hospital,
      medical facility, or a combination of both, constructed by the Orleans Hospital Service
      District, but shall apply to the construction of any additions or modifications of a hospital,
      medical facility, or a combination of both, constructed by the Orleans Hospital Service
      District following the completion of the initial construction.

Q.41. What is the A+B method to determine the lowest responsive bidder for public works
      contracts?                                                        R.S. 38:2211.2

A.41. R.S. 38:2211.2 provides for a pilot program to authorize local governmental subdivisions
      and political subdivisions to use A+B bidding method to determine the lowest responsive
      bidder on a contract for public works.

       The law defines "A+B bidding" and "owner" as follows:

       (1) "A+B bidding" means cost plus time bidding that factors time plus cost to determine
       the low bid. Under the A+B method, each submitted bid has two components where "A" is
       the traditional bid for the contract items and is the dollar amount for all work to be
       performed under the contract, and "B" is a "bid" of the total number of calendar days


                                                                                      Page 26 of 65
       PUBLIC BID LAW
       REVISED 02/2026

             required to complete the project, as estimated by the bidder. Bid days are multiplied by a
             user cost, furnished by the project owner, and added to the "A" component to obtain the
             total bid. The bid for award to the lowest responsive bidder is based on a combination of
             the bid for the contract items and the associated cost of time.

             (2) "Owner" means a "local governmental subdivision" or a "political subdivision" as
             defined in La. Const. Art. VI, Sec. 44(1) and (2).

             The pilot program is limited to 15 projects subject to prior approval of the House and
             Senate committees on transportation, highways, and public works. If the legislative
             committees approve a project, the owner is required to submit in writing to the chairmen
             of committees, the name and address of the lowest responsive bidder awarded the
             contract, together with the bid values of the A+B components. Further, upon completion
             and acceptance of the project, the owner is required to submit in writing to the chairmen
             of the committees a project report that includes the final project cost and an evaluation of
             whether or not contract times were reduced, costs were acceptable, and quality was
             maintained by use of the A+B bid method.

             The law provides that bidding documents may contain alternates, which allow for different
             materials or methods of construction, provided that any such alternate materials are
             currently approved by the local governmental subdivision or political subdivision.

             The law became effective August 1, 2019. It supersedes any conflicting provisions of any
             law, including the Public Bid Law, but the provisions of the Public Bid Law are otherwise
             applicable to such contracts.

       Q.42. Are there any special provisions for public works projects by local government
             entities that receive State funds and enter into contracts with third-party entities?

       A.42. Yes. R.S. 38:2225.6, as enacted by Act 436 of the 2025 Regular Session (eff. June 20,
             2025), provides for the establishment of Public-Private Contract Protocols.

NEW          All contracts between local government entities and third-party entities shall require a
2025         preconstruction meeting between:

                 •   The local government entity;
                 •   The contractor;
                 •   And the design professional of record.

             Notice of the meeting shall also be afforded to the appropriate State entity. The
             preconstruction meeting’s purpose is to establish clear expectations of:

                 •   The contract deliverables;
                 •   Project deadlines;
                 •   Accountability standards;
                 •   Payment schedules; and
                 •   An expedited grievance procedure for complaints.

             The preconstruction meeting shall accomplish the following:




                                                                                          Page 27 of 65
       PUBLIC BID LAW
       REVISED 02/2026

                  •   Establish a designated person who shall be the point of contact for the local
                      government entity during the project;
                  •   Establish a procedure for the payment by electronic fund transfer or an agreed
                      upon method of payment to contractors; and
                  •   Establish a procedure whereby the local governmental entity accepts documents
                      which are digitally signed.

              On or before July 1, 2026, the Division of Administration shall establish and maintain
              software for local government entities and contractors that receive State funding. The
              local government entities shall utilize the software to track payments to contractors.

       III. Materials and Supplies                                                     R.S. 38:2212.1


       Q.43. What are materials and supplies?

       A.43. Materials and supplies are not defined in the statutes; in this context, however, they are
             commonly understood to be the movable property necessary to conduct public business,
             from paper and pens to computers and printers.

              Vehicles, including built to order vessels, are materials and supplies for the purposes of
              the Public Bid Law. AG Op. No. 24-0151.

       Q.44. Are all contracts for the purchase of materials and supplies subject to the Public
             Bid Law?

       A.44. Local political subdivisions and local governmental entities are required to use the Public
             Bid Law for the procurement of materials and supplies if the cost is over the contract limit
             of $60,000, unless an exception exists. Examples of exceptions include: group purchasing
             options for hospitals (R.S. 38:2212.1(G)), schools (R.S. 38:2212.1(N)), and Local Public
             Safety Agencies/Departments (R.S. 38:2212.1(P)); emergency procurements; or buying
             items off the state contract using the LPC. Transactions between public entities are not
             subject to the Public Bid Law, as long as a fair price is received for the goods.

              State entities are required to use the LPC for the purchase of materials and supplies, and
              may purchase off the state contract or bid for items over to the amount provided by the
              latest small purchase executive order issued in accordance with R.S. 39:1596.         R.S.
              39:1594*. Executive Order JML 24-114 provides executive branch entities with certain
              procurement procedures for items $25,000 or under.
NEW
2025          * As amended by Act 5 of the 2025 Regular Session (eff. June 11, 2025).

              A. Contract Limits

       Q.45. What is the threshold, or contract limit (minimum), for purchases of materials and
             supplies by local political subdivisions?

       A.45. Contracts by local political subdivisions and local governmental entities for purchases of
             materials and supplies with a value of more than $60,000 must be advertised and let for
             contract with the lowest responsible bidder. Purchases of $30,000 or more, but less than



                                                                                          Page 28 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

       $60,000 dollars, shall be made by obtaining no fewer than 3 quotes by telephone,
       facsimile, email, or any other printable electronic form. If telephone quotes are received,
       a written confirmation of the accepted offers shall be obtained and made a part of the
       purchase file. For purchases less than $30,000, but greater than $1,000, prudent practice
       suggests obtaining at least 3 written quotes, though the law does not so require.

Q.46. Does an exception to this threshold exist for purchase by a local governmental unit
      of a used or new motor vehicle for conversion into a law enforcement vehicle?
      Please explain the meaning of R.S. 38:2212.1(A)(2)(a).

A.46. Generally, the Public Bid Law mandates that public entities shall obtain at least three
      telephone, fax, email, or other printable electronic form for all purchases of materials and
      supplies in an amount of $30,000 to $60,000. Public entities are mandated to bid out all
      purchases of materials and supplies which exceed $60,000, unless another exception
      applies.

       R.S. 38:2212.1(A)(2)(a) provides an exception to these general requirements for the
       purchase of materials and supplies for use by local governments to purchase new or used
       law enforcement vehicles, fire service vehicles, or a fire-fighting or rescue apparatus,
       which do not exceed $70.000 per vehicle or apparatus. This exception further
       provides that any such purchase which the sum is in excess of $70,000 per vehicle shall
       be advertised and let for bid. The law does not provide a definition of fire-fighting or
       rescue apparatus.

       For purchases of $70,000 or less per vehicle made under the exception provided by
       R.S. 38:2212.1(A)(2)(a), the statute does not require a specific amount or type of quotes
       that should be fully documented in the public entity’s contract files. However, the statute
       appears to require that more than one form of documentation be obtained to support the
       reasonableness of the purchase and be retained in the contract files of the public entity.

       The purchase of all other vehicles (non-law enforcement or non-fire service) are subject
       to the general requirements of the Public Bid Law. Public entities making purchases of
       non-law enforcement and non-fire service vehicles with a cost of $30,000 to $60,000 shall
       obtain at least three quotes as noted above. Any purchase of a non-law enforcement or
       non-fire service vehicle with a total cost over $60,000, shall be bid out, unless another
       exception applies.

       The Public Bid Law prohibits the splitting of purchases into smaller amounts in order to
       avoid bidding out the purchase.

Q.47. May a public entity purchase a fleet of law enforcement vehicles without bidding if
      each vehicle is below the $70,000 threshold?

A.47. Yes. The public entity must bid out the purchase if the total cost for any vehicle purchased
      exceeds $70,000. The exception under R.S. 38:2212.1(A)(2)(a) specifically provides for
      the $70,000 limit to be per vehicle and not as a total expenditure amount.

Q.48. What procedures exist for procurement of Materials and Supplies?




                                                                                   Page 29 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

A.48. Absent an exception, contracts by local political subdivisions and local governmental
      entities for the purchase of materials and supplies that exceed the threshold of $60,000
      must be advertised for bid and let for contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

       Public entities that have contracts for purchases of materials and supplies for less than
       $60,000 but greater than or equal to $30,000 must, pursuant to R.S. 38:2212.1(A)(1)(b):

               Obtain no less than three quotes by telephone, facsimile, email, or
               any other printable electronic form; and if telephone quotes are
               received, a written confirmation of the accepted offers shall be
               obtained and made a part of the purchase file.

       If a lower bid than the accepted bid is rejected, the reason for the rejection must be noted.

       Although not mandatory, public entities seeking contracts for purchases of materials and
       supplies for less than $1,000 should consider, as part of a good public policy requiring
       governmental accountability, obtaining and documenting at least 3 verbal quotes, if
       possible.

       Public entities seeking contracts for purchases of materials and supplies for less than
       $30,000, but greater than $1,000, should consider, as part of good public policy requiring
       governmental accountability, obtaining at least 3 written quotes.


       B. Advertisement

Q.49. What requirements exist for the advertisement of bids?
                                                  R.S. 38:2212.1(B)(1) and R.S. 38:2214

A.49. The advertisement for bids shall be published 2 times in a newspaper in the locality. The
      word ‘locality’ is not defined; the AG has interpreted it to mean the area where the political
      subdivision is located AG Op. No. 83-0720.

       The first publication must appear at least 15 days before the opening of the bids and
       shall not occur on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.

       Plans and specifications shall be available to bidders the day of the first advertisement
       and until 24 hours before bid opening date.

       R.S. 38:2214(A), states that the advertisement for bids shall include the time and place
       that the bids will be received and shall at that time and place publicly open the bids and
       read them aloud. No public entity shall accept or take any bids including hand-delivered
       bids on days that are recognized as holidays by the United States Postal Service.

Please note: Use of the electronic bidding option through services such as Central Bidding does
not eliminate the newspaper advertising requirements of R.S. 38:2212.1(B)(1).

Q.50. May a public entity specify alternates?                                R.S. 38:2212.1(B)(3)




                                                                                     Page 30 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

A.50. The public entity may specify no more than three (3) alternates and must accept them in
      the order they appear on the bid form. Determination of the low bidder shall be on the
      basis of the sum of the base bid and any alternates accepted. However, the public entity
      may accept alternates in any order that does not affect determination of the low bidder.

       The Attorney General has opined that public entities are under no obligation to accept an
       alternate. If the public entity exercises its discretion to accept alternates, they must be
       accepted in the order in which they are listed, unless it does not affect the determination
       of the low bidder.                                              See AG Op. No. 15-0052

Q.51. May a public entity specify a particular brand?
                                                                   R.S. 38:2212.1(C)(1) and (2)

A.51. Yes, if in the public interest, a public entity may specify a particular brand, make, or
      manufacturer in the specifications using the model or catalog number. These specific
      brand names denote the quality standard of the product desired and does not restrict
      prospective bidders; equivalent products must be acceptable.

       C. Bidding

Q.52. What is electronic bidding?                                        R.S. 38:2212.1(B)(4)(a)

A.52. Contractors shall be provided the option to submit bids for public contracts through a
      uniform and secure electronic interactive system. Political subdivisions shall follow the
      standards for the receipt of electronic bids adopted by the office of the governor, division
      of administration, and the office of information technology as provided for in LAC
      4:XV.701, and shall make the appropriate provisions necessary for the acceptance of
      electronic bids for all purchases requiring competitive bidding. Any special condition or
      requirement for the submission shall be specified in the advertisement for bids.

       Please Note: Use of the electronic bidding option through services such as Central Bidding
       does not eliminate the newspaper advertising requirements of R.S. 38:2212(G) for public
       works (See, Q.16) or R.S.38:2212.1(B)(1) for materials and supplies (See, Q.48).

Q.53. Who is exempt from the electronic bidding requirement under the Public Bid Law?

A.53. The exemptions from requiring public entities to accept electronic bid submission for
      materials and supplies provided by R.S. 38:2212.1(B)(4) include:

   ➢ Public entities that are currently without available high-speed Internet access until high-
     speed Internet access becomes available;

   ➢ Any parish with a police jury form of government and a population of fewer than twenty
     thousand;

   ➢ Any city or municipality with a population of fewer than ten thousand; and

   ➢ Any special service district created by a police jury form of government that is unable to
     comply without securing and expending additional funding.




                                                                                   Page 31 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

       Public entities shall have the option to require that all bids be submitted electronically
       for any competitive bid let out for public bid.

Q.54. When is the bid opening and what must occur?

A.54. The Bid opening shall be held at the date, time, and location noticed in the public
      entity’s advertisement. The bid opening shall be at least 15 days after the first
      published advertisement.

       At the bid opening, the public entity shall publicly open the submitted bids and read
       them aloud.

Q.55. What are the rules on the opening of bids?                                    R.S. 38:2214

A.55. R.S. 38:2212.1(J) provides that the opening of bids is governed by the provisions of
      R.S. 38:2214. This statute requires the public entity to designate the time and place that
      the bids will be received in the advertisement for bids. It further requires the public entity
      at that time and place to publicly open the bids and read them aloud. No public entity
      shall accept or take any bids, including hand-delivered bids, on days that are
      recognized as holidays by the United States Postal Service.

       D. Bid Selection

Q.56. May the public entity reject all bids?                                         R.S. 38:2214

A.56. R.S. 38:2214(B) provides that the public entity may reject for just cause all bids. The
      statute does not define “just cause” for materials and supplies, but does define “just
      cause” for public works, including but not limited to:

   ➢ The public entity's unavailability of funds sufficient for the construction of the
     proposed public work;

   ➢ The failure of any bidder to submit a bid within an established threshold of the
     preconstruction estimates for that public work, as part of the bid specifications;
   ➢ A substantial change by the public entity prior to the award in the scope or design
     of the proposed public work;

   ➢ A determination by the public entity not to build the proposed public work within
     twelve months of the date for the public opening and reading of bids; and

   ➢ The disqualification by the public entity of all bidders.

Q.57. What is a responsible and responsive bidder?

A.57. A responsible and responsive bidder is one whose bid meets the requirements set out in
      the advertised bidding documents.

Q.58. What happens if a bidder is not a “responsible bidder”?




                                                                                     Page 32 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

A.58. While R.S. 38:2212.1 does not provide for a formal process for the disqualification of an
      apparent low bidder who the public entity determines is not a responsive and responsible
      bidder, the public entity can utilize the procedures outlined in R.S. 38:2212(X) for public
      works contracts [Q.31.] to ensure that due process is afforded in the disqualification
      process. See AG Op. No. 13-0008.

       E. Exceptions

Q.59. What are the exceptions to bidding requirements for contracts for materials and
      supplies?

A.59. Yes, there are exceptions for certain purchases of materials and supplies. These
      exceptions include:

       ➢ purchases off the State Contract under cooperative purchasing agreements;
         R.S. 38:2212.1(F)

       ➢ purchases of surplus materials and supplies from another public entity or the
         government of the United States or if the particular transaction is governed by the
         procurement code; R.S. 38:2212.1(D)

       ➢ purchases off of the Federal General Services Administration Lists, provided that the
         items are not otherwise available cheaper on State Contract and the public entity
         utilizes a Louisiana licensed dealer or distributor; R.S. 38:2212.1(E)

       ➢ purchases by hospitals service districts under qualified group purchasing
         organizations; R.S.38:2212.1(G)

       ➢ purchases of used fire and emergency response vehicles, including associated
         equipment, with a per unit purchase cost of less than one hundred thousand dollars
         through a request for proposals; R.S. 38:2238.2, * Note: The definition of Fire and
         Emergency Response Vehicles under R.S. 38:2238.1, expressly excludes sedans,
         pickup trucks, mobile crime labs, tow trucks, and buses used by law enforcement.

       ➢ lease, rental, or purchases of telecommunications data processing systems,
         including equipment, and related services, by political subdivisions through a request
         for proposals; R.S. 38:2237

       ➢ purchases of materials, equipment and supplies by school districts and schools
         through a qualified group purchasing organization; R.S. 38:2212.1(N)

       ➢ purchases of materials, equipment and supplies by municipal and parish fire
         departments, volunteer fire departments, fire protection districts, municipal police
         departments, or related public safety departments or agencies, including but not
         limited to municipal or parish ambulance services, or ambulance service districts,
         through a group purchasing organization; R.S. 38:2212.1(P)

       ➢ purchase of materials, supplies, vehicles or equipment by the State, any levee
         district, levee drainage district, municipality, parish or other political subdivision of the




                                                                                       Page 33 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

           state through an existing public contract of another political subdivision within one
           year of the opening of bids; R.S. 38:321.1; and

       ➢ purchases of animals trained to perform special task, including but not limited to
         narcotics detection, bomb detection, arson investigation, and rescue techniques by:

           o   Any local law enforcement agency for the principal purpose of aiding in the
               detection of criminal activity, enforcement of laws, or apprehension of offenders,
               and
           o   Any local public safety agency for the purpose of search and rescue services.

Q.60. Does the Public Bid Law apply to a procurement transaction between two public
      entities?                                                   R.S. 38:2212.1(D)

A.60. Generally, no, R.S. 38:2212.1(D) provides that the Public Bid Law does not apply to:

       ➢ a public entity purchasing surplus materials and supplies from another public entity;
         or

       ➢ the government of the United States; or

       ➢ a transaction governed by the procurement code.

               1. Piggybacking

Q.61. When may public entities piggyback on other public entities’ contracts under
      R.S. 38:321.1?                                                   R.S. 38:321.1

A.61. R.S. 38:321.1 provides an alternative procurement method as a cost-savings alternative
      for certain purchases. This method, commonly referred to as “piggybacking,” provides
      that, in addition to the procurement methods available to all political subdivisions, the
      State, levee districts, levee drainage districts, municipalities, parishes or other political
      subdivisions of the state may purchase materials, supplies, vehicles or equipment through
      an existing public contract of another political subdivision within one (1) year of the
      opening of bids, provided that the following conditions are met:

       (1) The contract was bid in compliance with R.S. 38:2211 et seq.*
       (2) The total purchases on the contract do not exceed two times what was
           purchased by the political subdivision bidding the contract.
       (3) The written consent of the political subdivision which bid the contract is
           obtained, as well as the contract number, and if applicable, the resolution
           accepting the contract.
       (4) The vendor agrees to the additional purchase.
       (5) The vendor, product, materials, supplies, vehicles, or equipment are identical to
           those specified in the existing public contract of the other political subdivision,
           and the price is the same as the original contract price.




                                                                                    Page 34 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

       *The State, municipality, parish or other political subdivision of the state may rely on the
       certificate of the political subdivision that the contract was bid in compliance with State
       law.

       A state agency or any local government agency may rely on certificates of the office of
       state procurement (OSP) that the contract was bid in compliance with Title 39
       (Procurement Code) and was adopted as a statewide cooperative contract pursuant to the
       cooperative purchase provisions of R.S. 39:1702, et seq., or from a local political
       subdivision that the contract was bid in compliance with State law. State agencies should
       consult with OSP prior to utilizing this provision.

       R.S. 38:321.1 is not applicable to contracts for Public Works. AG Op. No. 16-0192

Q.62. With enactment of R.S. 38:321.1, can parishes, municipalities and political
      subdivisions still “piggyback” using the Local Services Law?
                                                                    R.S. 33:1324

A.62. Yes. In AG Op. No. 17-0152, the AG opined that R.S. 38:321.1 provides an alternative
      procurement method for a parish, municipality or political subdivision to piggyback off of a
      contract procured by another political subdivision. However, these entities may also utilize
      the Local Services Law (R.S. 33:1324) to piggyback off of a public contract procured by
      another political subdivision.

       The following steps are necessary for a parish, municipality or other political subdivision
       to piggyback off of a public contract procured by another political subdivision using the
       Local Services Law:

          (1) Verify that the contract was bid in compliance with state law.
          (2) Verify that the contract is still active, fresh or “viable.”
          (3) Obtain written consent or approval from the other public entity who bid the
               contract and obtain confirmation as to the contract number and, if necessary, the
               council resolution accepting the contract/bid.
          (4) Confirm that the vendor and the product, services, materials, supplies or
               equipment are the same and that the price is same or lower.
       Additionally, the Attorney General recommends that entities utilizing the Local Services
       Law to piggyback off of another political subdivision’s public contract to adopt and
       advertise an ordinance or resolution setting forth the terms of its purchasing method in
       accordance with R.S. 33:1325.

       Therefore, a parish, municipality or political subdivision may use either method,
       R.S. 38:321.1 [Q.61] or R.S. 33:1324 (Local Services Law), to piggyback off of a public
       contract procured by another political subdivision, as long as all relevant steps are
       followed.

               2. Qualified Group Purchasing

Q.63. May hospitals engage in qualified group purchasing?                        R.S. 38:2212.1

A.63. Yes. R.S. 38:2212.1(G)) authorizes any hospital owned or operated by a hospital service



                                                                                    Page 35 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

       district, a municipality, the state, or any other public entity to enter into an agreement with
       one or more qualified group purchasing organizations for the purpose of obtaining bids for
       the purchase of materials and supplies, with certain requirements.
       The term “qualified group purchasing organization” means an organization, whether
       for profit or not for profit, that has contracts for the sale of materials or supplies with at
       least fifteen hospitals within the United States.

          1. The qualified group purchasing organization shall submit a price list for those
             materials and supplies it offers.

          2. Price list must remain in effect for a stated period of time that may not be less
             than three months.

          3. The price list shall thereafter be considered for all purposes to be a valid and
             binding bid by the qualified group purchasing organization during the
             effective period of the agreement, and no additional bid by the qualified group
             purchasing organization shall be necessary.

       A hospital owned by the state may purchase equipment from a qualified group
       purchasing organization if the price is less than that for the same or comparable equipment
       on the state contract.

       R.S. 38:2212.1(H) provides that the commissioners, governing board, or governing
       authority of any hospital owned or operated by a hospital service district, a public
       trust, any municipality, or any other public entity, may authorize by resolution, the
       participation in, or the purchasing from, a qualified group purchasing organization for the
       purchase of supplies and materials, without complying with the Public Bid Law or any other
       applicable provision of law when it appears to the authority or secretary that participation
       would positively affect the economic situation or efficiency of operations of the hospital. A
       positive effect on the economic situation or efficiency of operations shall be presumed
       when the total price of items to be purchased from the qualified group purchasing
       organization is less than the total price of those items if purchased from the state bid list.

       The secretary of the Department of Health and Hospitals for any hospital owned or
       operated by the state, may also authorize the participation in, or the purchasing from, a
       qualified group purchasing organization for the purchase of supplies and materials, without
       complying with the Public Bid Law or any other applicable provision of law when it appears
       to the authority or the secretary that participation would positively affect the economic
       situation or efficiency of operations of the hospital.

Q.64. May school districts and schools engage in qualified group purchasing?
                                                                     R.S. 38:2212.1(N)*

A.64. R.S. 38:2212.1(N), allows any public school district or public school to enter into an
      agreement with one or more qualified group purchasing organizations for the purchase
      of materials, equipment, and supplies, including any installation thereof.

       ➢ Any such agreement requires the qualified group purchasing organization submit a
         price list for those materials, equipment, and supplies offered by it and that the prices
         quoted on the list remain in effect for a stated period of not less than three months.



                                                                                       Page 36 of 65
            PUBLIC BID LAW
            REVISED 02/2026


                       ➢ Any such price list shall be considered, for all purposes, to be a valid and binding bid
                         by the qualified group purchasing organizations during the effective period of the
                         agreement, and no additional bid by the qualified group purchasing organization is
                         necessary.

                       ➢ Price lists submitted by a qualified group purchasing organization are not public
                         records and shall not be available for inspection; however, the agreement setting forth
                         the existence of the price list and the effective date thereof is a public record. That
                         portion of the price list setting forth the price of the materials, equipment, or supplies
                         being purchased shall become a public record at the time of opening bids or upon the
                         execution of a contract for the purchase of materials, equipment or supplies.

                       A “qualified group purchasing organization” means an organization, whether for profit
                       or not for profit, of which two or more public school districts are members and that solicits
                       proposals or bids from vendors of materials, equipment, or supplies of the type and nature
                       as may be purchased by a public school district or public school. A “qualified group
    NEW
    2025
                       purchasing organization” also includes an “external procurement activity” as defined in
                       R.S. 39:1556.

                       * As amended by Act 204 of the 2025 Regular Session (eff. August 1, 2025).

                              R.S. 39:1556(23) defines an “external procurement activity” as any buying
                              organization not located in the state which, if located in the state, would qualify as
                              a “public procurement unit”. An agency of the United State government is an
       Clarification          external procurement activity. This means an organization not located in Louisiana
                              that, if located in Louisiana, would qualify as a public procurement unit.

                              R.S. 39:1556(44) defines a “public procurement unit” as either a local public
                              procurement unit or a state public procurement unit.

                                      R.S. 39:1556(32) defines “local public procurement unit” to mean any
                                      parish, city, town, governmental body, and any other subdivision of the
                                      state or public agency thereof, public authority, public educational, health,
                                      or other institution, and to the extent provided by law, any other entity which
                                      expends public funds for the acquisition or leasing of supplies, services,
                                      major repairs, and construction, and any nonprofit corporation operating a
                                      charitable hospital.

                                      R.S. 39:1556(58) defines “state public procurement unit to mean the
                                      Central Purchasing Agency (Office of State Procurement) and any other
                                      purchasing agency of the State.

                       Therefore, it appears that a “qualified group purchasing organization” may either be:
                              • A Federal agency or a state or local political subdivision of another state; or
Clarification                 • A non-governmental entity that has two or more Louisiana public school
                                  districts as members.




                                                                                                      Page 37 of 65
                PUBLIC BID LAW
                REVISED 02/2026

                       A school board may purchase materials, equipment, or supplies directly from or through
                       a qualified group purchasing organization if the price is less than that for the same or
                       substantially similar materials, equipment, or supplies on the state contract or bid list. A
                       school board may also purchase materials, equipment, or supplies directly from or through
                       a qualified group purchasing organization if the same or substantially similar materials,
                       equipment, or supplies are not under State contract or on the State bid list. The qualified
Clarification          group purchasing organization may also participate in the ordinary bidding process.

                       In order to show that the school board or public school auditee meets all of the above
                       requirements to utilize the Public Bid Law exception under R.S. 38:2212.1(N)* to purchase
                       directly from a qualified group purchasing organization, the following is an example of the
                       information the auditee should document and maintain in their files:

                       •       Documentation showing that the vendor is a “qualified group purchasing
                               organization” including:

                               o       The vendor meets the definition of “external procurement activity” as
                                       defined R.S. 39:1556(23) or the vendor has two or more Louisiana public
                                       school districts or schools as members;
                               o       That the vendor solicits proposals and bids to establish price lists for
                                       materials, equipment and supplies, and
                               o       That the prices on the price list will remain in effect for a state period of time
                                       of no less than three months.

                       •       Documentation, such as an email from the Office of State Procurement, confirming
                               that the materials, equipment, or supplies are not available on an existing State
                               Contract for a lower price than the price list of the qualified group purchasing
                               organization.
         NEW
         2025
                               * As amended by Act 204 of the 2025 Regular Session (eff. August 1, 2025).


                Q.65. May public safety departments, such as municipal police departments and
                      municipal and parish fire departments, engage in qualified group purchasing?
                                                                                     R.S. 38:2212.1(P)*

                A.65. R.S. 38:2212.1(P) allows municipal and parish fire departments, volunteer fire
                      departments, fire protection districts, municipal police departments, or related public safety
                      departments or agencies, including but not limited to municipal or parish ambulance
                      services, or ambulance service districts, to enter into an agreement with one or more
                      qualified group purchasing organizations for the purchase of materials, equipment, and
                      supplies, including any installation thereof.

                       ➢ Any such agreement requires the qualified group purchasing organization submit a
                         price list for those materials, equipment, and supplies offered by it and that the prices
                         quoted on the list remain in effect for a stated period of not less than three months.

                       ➢ Any such price list shall be considered, for all purposes, to be a valid and binding bid
                         by the qualified group purchasing organizations during the effective period of the




                                                                                                         Page 38 of 65
       PUBLIC BID LAW
       REVISED 02/2026

                    agreement, and no additional bid by the qualified group purchasing organization is
                    necessary.

                 ➢ Price lists submitted by a qualified group purchasing organization are not public
                   records and shall not be available for inspection; however, the agreement setting forth
                   the existence of the price list and the effective date thereof is a public record. That
                   portion of the price list setting forth the price of the materials, equipment, or supplies
                   being purchased shall become a public record at the time of opening bids or upon the
                   execution of a contract for the purchase of materials, equipment or supplies.

                 A “qualified group purchasing organization” means an organization, whether for profit
                 or not for profit, of which two or more public departments, agencies, or non-profit fire,
                 ambulance service, public safety, or police authority, are members and that solicits
NEW              proposals or bids from vendors of materials, equipment, or supplies of the type and nature
2025             as may be purchased by any such department, agency, or non-profit corporation. A
                 “qualified group purchasing organization” also includes an “external procurement activity”
                 as defined in R.S. 39:1556.

                        * As amended by Act 204 of the 2025 Regular Session (eff. August 1, 2025).

                        R.S. 39:1556(23) defines an “external procurement activity” as any buying
                        organization not located in the state which, if located in the state, would qualify as
                        a “public procurement unit”. An agency of the United State government is an
 Clarification          external procurement activity. This means an organization not located in Louisiana
                        that, if located in Louisiana, would qualify as a public procurement unit.

                        R.S. 39:1556(44) defines a “public procurement unit” as either a local public
                        procurement unit or a state public procurement unit.

                                R.S. 39:1556(32) defines “local public procurement unit” to mean any
                                parish, city, town, governmental body, and any other subdivision of the
                                state or public agency thereof, public authority, public educational, health,
                                or other institution, and to the extent provided by law, any other entity which
                                expends public funds for the acquisition or leasing of supplies, services,
                                major repairs, and construction, and any nonprofit corporation operating a
                                charitable hospital.

                                R.S. 39:1556(58) defines “state public procurement unit to mean the
                                Central Purchasing Agency (Office of State Procurement) and any other
                                purchasing agency of the State.

                 Therefore, it appears that a “qualified group purchasing organization” may either be:
                     • A Federal agency or a state or local political subdivision of another state; or
Clarification        • A non-governmental entity that has two or more Louisiana public safety
                         departments, agencies, or authorities as members.

                  A municipal and parish fire department, volunteer fire department, fire protection district,
                 municipal police department, or related public safety department or agency may purchase
                 materials, equipment, or supplies directly from or through a qualified group purchasing
                 organization if the price is less than that for the same or substantially similar materials,



                                                                                                Page 39 of 65
           PUBLIC BID LAW
           REVISED 02/2026

                  equipment, or supplies on the state contract or bid list. The department, agency, or non-
                  profit corporation may also purchase materials, equipment, or supplies directly from or
                  through a qualified group purchasing organization if the same or substantially similar
                  materials, equipment, or supplies are not under State contract or on the State bid list. The
Clarification     qualified group purchasing organization may also participate in the ordinary bidding
                  process.

                  In order to show that the public safety auditee meets all of the above requirements to
                  utilize the Public Bid Law exception under R.S. 38:2212.1(P)* to purchase directly from a
                  qualified group purchasing organization, the following is an example of the information the
                  auditee should document and maintain in their files:

                  •       Documentation showing that the vendor is a “qualified group purchasing
                          organization” including:
                          o      The vendor meets the definition of “external procurement activity” as
                                 defined R.S. 39:1556(23) or the vendor has two or more Louisiana public
                                 safety departments or agencies as members;
                          o      That the vendor solicits proposals and bids to establish price lists for
                                 materials, equipment and supplies, and
                          o      That the prices on the price list will remain in effect for a state period of time
                                 of no less than three months.

                  •       Documentation, such as an email from the Office of State Procurement, confirming
                          that the materials, equipment, or supplies are not available on an existing State
                          Contract for a lower price than the price list of the qualified group purchasing
    NEW                   organization.
    2025
                  * As amended by Act 204 of the 2025 Regular Session (eff. August 1, 2025).

                          3. Reverse Auctions

           Q.66. May electronic bidding be used for “reverse auctions”?                           R.S. 38:2271

           A.66. Yes, if the procurement officer for the political subdivision determines that electronic
                 bidding is in the best interest of the political subdivision and that electronic online bidding
                 is more advantageous than other methods, reverse bidding may be used.

                  R.S. 38:2271 provides the detailed procedure. The statute defines "reverse auction" as a
                  competitive online solicitation process on the internet for materials, supplies, services,
                  products, equipment or consulting services* in which vendors compete against each other
                  online in real time in an open and interactive environment. The statute further provides
                  that in a reverse auction, the political subdivision shall develop policies and may require,
                  among other things, that:

                        (1) Vendors register before the opening date and time.
                        (2) Vendors be prequalified prior to placing bids.
                        (3) The solicitation shall designate an opening date and time and the closing
                            date and time.




                                                                                                   Page 40 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

            (4) At the opening date and time, the using agency shall begin accepting online
                bids and continue accepting bids until the bidding is officially closed.
                Registered bidders shall be allowed to lower the price of their bids below the
                lowest bid posted on the Internet until the closing date and time.
            (5) Bidders' identities shall not be revealed during the bidding process.
            (6) All bids shall be posted electronically and updated on a real-time basis.
            (7) The using political subdivision shall retain the right to cancel the solicitation if it
                determines that it is in the political subdivision's best interest.

            (8) The using political subdivision shall retain its existing authority to determine
                 the criteria that will be used as a basis for making awards.
     Act 102 of the 2021 Regular Session added “consulting services” for use in a reverse
     auction; however, local political subdivisions should note that consulting services are
     excluded from the Public Bid Law. Therefore, solicitations of bids – even by reverse auction
     -- to award contracts for consulting services is not required by law and is completely
     discretionary for local political subdivisions.

Q.67. What are the notice requirements for a “reverse auction”?                   R.S. 38:2271(C)

A.67. R.S. 38:2271 requires adequate public notice for purchases of materials, supplies,
      equipment or consulting services* by a political subdivision using a reverse auction be
      given as follows:
          • The advertisement or notice shall be published twice in a newspaper in the
             locality, the first advertisement to appear at least 15 days before the opening
             date of the reverse auction. The word ‘locality’ is not defined; the AG has
             interpreted it to mean the area where the political subdivision is located
             AG Op. No. 83-0720.

           • In addition to the newspaper advertisement, a political subdivision may also
             publish an advertisement by electronic media available to the general public.

       ➢ The first publication of the advertisement shall not occur on a Saturday, Sunday,
         or legal holiday.

       *Act 102 of the 2021 Regular Session added “consulting services” for use in a reverse
       auction; however, local political subdivisions should note that consulting services are
       excluded from the Public Bid Law. Therefore, solicitations of bids – even by reverse
       auction -- to award contracts for consulting services is not required by law and is
       completely discretionary for local political subdivisions.

       4. Other Exceptions

Q.68. How do political subdivisions procure computers and software?
                                                                                        R.S. 38:2234

A.68. Pursuant to R.S. 38:2234, known as the Political Subdivisions Telecommunications and
      Data Processing Procurement Law, political subdivisions may lease, rent, or purchase



                                                                                        Page 41 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

      telecommunications or data processing systems, including equipment, and related
      services, through a Request for Proposal (RFP).

      This law is a permissive alternative to the Public Bid Law. Political subdivisions may still
      use public bid or purchase such items off the state contract.

      Procedures for such procurement are contained in R.S. 38:2237.

      ➢ Public notice of the RFP shall be given at least thirty days prior to the date scheduled
        for opening the RFP.

      ➢ Written notice of the RFP shall be mailed to persons and corporations who are
        known to be in a position to furnish the equipment, systems, and related services.

      ➢ This public notice may also be given by electronic media available to the
        general public.

      ➢ The RFP will indicate the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors,
        shall clearly define the tasks to be performed under the contract, the functional
        specifications, the criteria to be used in evaluating the proposals, and the time
        frames within which the work must be completed.

      ➢ An award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined
        in writing by the governing authority of the political subdivision to be the most
        advantageous, considering price and other evaluation factors set forth in the RFP.
        This is different from when the public entity is letting the contract through sealed
        bidding as the public entity is required to award the contract to the lowest
        responsive and responsible bidder.

      ➢ The governing authority of the political subdivision may reject all proposals when
        the action is deemed in the best interest of the political subdivision.

      ➢ If vendors submit written proposals, the proposals of the successful vendor shall
        be incorporated into the final contract consummated with that vendor.

      Political subdivisions may, at their option, procure telecommunications and data
      processing equipment, systems, or related services in accordance with the Public Bid Law.
      However, in the event an invitation for bids is used in lieu of a RFP, written notice of that
      fact shall be given to all bidders, and that notice shall also state that the RFP procedure
      will not apply.

Q.69. What are the rules for purchases from the federal government related to
      homeland security?                                        R.S. 38:2212.6

A.69. R.S. 38:2212.6 provides that any public procurement unit may procure materials,
      supplies, equipment, and services related to homeland security from federal General
      Services Administration supply schedules. Such purchases shall:

      ➢ Use a Louisiana distributor.




                                                                                    Page 42 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

       ➢ Use the competitive ordering procedures of the federal General Services
         Administration.

       ➢ Receive prior approval from the director of the Governor's Office of Homeland
         Security and Emergency Preparedness, or his designee.

Q.70. What requirements exist for purchases made by a public safety agency spending
      federal grant dollars?

A.70. Louisiana law provides that purchases made by a public safety agency following the
      guidelines and restrictions established pursuant to the expenditure of federal grant dollars
      shall be made by obtaining not less than three telephone or facsimile quotations. The
      agency must, however, also comply with the federal grant requirements, which may
      include competitive bidding. If stricter, federal law must be followed.

Q.71. Are there any exceptions that allow procurement without bidding of specialized
      cranes and replacement parts by port commissions and port, harbor, and terminal
      districts?                                                     R.S. 38:2320.1

A.71. Yes. R.S. 38:2320.1 authorizes port commissions and port, harbor, and terminal
      districts to purchase port-related specialized cranes and any replacement parts
      through a request for proposals process, in lieu of formal bidding. The procedures
      outlined in R.S. 38:2320.1 shall be followed in order for the exception to the ordinary
      bid process to apply.


IV. Emergencies


Q.72. Are there exceptions to the Public Bid Law for emergencies?               R.S. 38:2212(P)

A.72. Yes, exceptions exist for 2 types of emergency situations: emergency and extreme
      emergency. The purchase of materials or supplies in the case of an extreme public
      emergency shall be governed by the provisions of R.S. 38:2212(P) and R.S. 38:2212.1(K).

       A. Emergency

Q.73. What is an emergency?                                                R.S. 38:2211(A)(5)(a)

A.73. An emergency is an unforeseen mischance bringing with it destruction or injury of life or
      property or the imminent threat of such destruction or injury.
      An emergency may also result from an order by any judicial body to take any
      immediate action that requires construction or repairs absent compliance with the
      formalities of the Public Bid Law, because of insufficient time to follow the advertising
      requirements as provided in R.S. 38:2212.

       For a municipally owned public utility, an emergency shall be deemed to exist and the
       public entity may negotiate as provided by R.S. 38:2212(P) for the purchase of fuel for
       the generation of its electric power if the public entity has first advertised for bids as
       provided by this Part but has failed to receive more than one bid.



                                                                                   Page 43 of 65
       PUBLIC BID LAW
       REVISED 02/2026


       Q.74. When is the emergency exception applied?                                    R.S. 38:2212(P)*

       A.74. After the emergency has been certified by the public entity at a public meeting, the Public
             Bid Law may be waived provided that notice was given to the public by publishing in the
             official journal. There is no longer a statutory deadline for the publication of the notice in
             the public entity’s official journal.
NEW
2025
              * As amended by Act 350 of the 2025 Regular Session (eff. August 1, 2025).

       Q.75. What special documentation is required for purchases under the emergency
             exception?                                                 R.S. 38:2212(P)

       A.75. Every contract that is negotiated shall be supported by written determination and
             findings by the public entity justifying the emergency.

              If contract action is taken pursuant to telephone or other oral offers, written confirmation
              of the accepted offer must be included in the file.
              The file of the public entity must contain:

              ➢ A minimum of the description of the work to be performed;
              ➢ The name and address of each offeror quoting; and
              ➢ The performance time and terms of each offer.

              If quotes lower than the accepted quote are not accepted, reasons for rejection must be
              in the file. Records must be kept a minimum of 6 years.

              B. Extreme Emergency

       Q.76. What is an extreme emergency?                                          R.S. 38:2211(A)(5)(b)

       A.76. An extreme emergency is a catastrophic event that causes the loss of ability to obtain
             a quorum of the members necessary to certify the emergency prior to making the
             expenditure to acquire materials or supplies or to make repairs necessary for the
             protection of life, property, or continued function of the public entity.

       Q.77. How is the extreme emergency exception applied?                             R.S. 38:2212(P)

       A.77. In the event of an emergency or an extreme emergency, the political subdivision may
             make such purchases to deal with the emergency as may be required immediately. After
             the events requiring immediate emergency procurement, the president of the police jury,
             the president of the parish council, the mayor of the municipality, or a person designated
             to act on behalf of the governing authority of the political subdivision, shall declare that an
             extreme emergency exists and shall cause such declaration to be published in the official
             journal within ten days or as soon as practicable thereafter.

       Q.78. What documentation is required for purchases under the extreme emergency
             exception?                                                 R.S. 38:2212(P)

       A.78. The requirements are the same as for emergencies listed above. [Q.75.]



                                                                                             Page 44 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026



V. Prohibitions

Q.79. May public entities who are not in compliance with the Audit Law let contracts for
      Public Works and Materials and Supplies?                           R.S. 38:2211.1

A.79. R.S. 38:2211.1 prohibits public entities who have failed to comply with the audit provisions
      of R.S. 24:513 from letting any public contracts under the Public Bid Law that utilizes any
      state funds, whether received through direct appropriations or through transfer from
      another public entity or whose funding relies upon the full faith and credit of the state.

       For the purposes of this provision, the term “state funds” includes any federal funds,
       including grants, that pass through the state.

       Any public entity that has been subject to this restriction, upon coming into compliance
       with the provisions of R.S. 24:513, shall immediately inform the Legislative Audit Advisory
       Council (LAAC) in writing of their compliance and, upon confirmation by LAAC, shall be
       immediately releases from the restrictions that were imposed.

Q.80. May public entities split public works projects or purchases of materials and
      supplies into several smaller projects/purchases to avoid the Public Bid Law?

A.80. No. Under no circumstances shall there be a division or separation of any public work
      project into smaller projects (splitting) if the division or separation would have the effect of
      avoiding the requirement that public work be advertised and let by contract to the lowest
      responsible and responsive bidder. R.S. 38:2212(V)

       The Attorney General has also opined that the purchase of like commodities (materials
       and supplies) during the course of a fiscal year must be aggregated and publicly bid if the
       total amount of purchases of like commodities during the fiscal year exceeds the contract
       limit. See AG Op. No. 02-0122.

Q.81. What provisions in the Public Bid Law address rejecting bids from convicted
      felons?                                                     R.S. 38:2212.9

A.81. R.S. 38:2212.9 provides that in awarding contracts, any public entity is authorized to
      reject the lowest bid from or avoid awarding the contract to, a business in which any
      individual with an ownership interest of five percent or more has been convicted of, or
      has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any state felony crime or equivalent
      federal felony crime committed in the solicitation or execution of a contract or bid
      awarded under the laws governing public contracts.

       The law does not impose a duty, responsibility, or requirement on a public entity to perform
       criminal background checks on contractors, vendors, or subcontractors. It shall be the
       responsibility of any person, company, or entity making an allegation of prior convictions
       on the part of any individual with an ownership interest of five percent or more in any
       bidder to present prima facie evidence supporting their claim to the public entity. If proved,
       the company whose bid is rejected shall be responsible to the public entity for the costs of
       rebidding, the increased costs of awarding to the second low bidder, or forfeiture of the
       bid bond, whichever is higher.


                                                                                       Page 45 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026


Q.82. May a commission, fee or other consideration be split or shared?
                                                                                   R.S. 14:141

A.82. Criminal code article R.S. 14:141 makes it a crime to split fees or commissions derived
      from the sale of goods and services with a public officer or employee in his official
      capacity. The penalty upon conviction is a mandatory fine of not more than $10,000 or
      imprisonment for not more than 10 years, or both.

Q.83. May public entities disqualify a bidder if they are not registered with the Louisiana
      Secretary of State?

A.83. No. Absent a statutory requirement for a vendor to be licensed to do business in the State,
      such as in the case of used motor vehicle dealers, a public entity cannot disqualify a
      potential out-of-state bidder as non-responsible because they are not registered with the
      Louisiana Secretary of State. Any such requirement appears to be a pre-qualification that
      is generally prohibited under the Public Bid Law.

       Any out-of-state vendor must comply with any applicable licensing requirements imposed
       by law.

Q.84. May an entity trade in surplus equipment for credit as part of the purchase of new
      materials, supplies, or equipment?

A.84. In general, "trading-in" is not allowed. For local government entities, the AG treats the
      disposal of surplus property and purchase of new property as two separate processes.
      Surplus property should be disposed of in accord with its applicable laws. New materials,
      supplies, or equipment should be purchased following the requirements under the Public
      Bid Law or any applicable exception such as purchase under an existing State contract.

Q.85. May a public entity disqualify a potential vendor that discriminates against firearm
      and ammunition industries?                                          R.S. 38:2216.1*

A.85. Yes, R.S. 38:2216.1 prohibits a public entity from entering into a contract with a value of
      $100,000 or more with a company for the purchase of goods or services unless the
      contract contains a written verification from the company of both of the following:

              1) The company does not have a practice, policy, guidance, or directive that
                 discriminates against a firearm entity or firearm trade association based solely
                 on the entity's or association's status as a firearm entity or firearm trade
                 association.

              2) The company will not discriminate against a firearm entity or firearm trade
                 association during the term of the contract based solely on the entity's or
                 association's status as a firearm entity or firearm trade association.

       The public entity is also prohibited from entering into a joint or multi-party contract for
       goods or services unless the contract contains the written verification required for each
       company that is party to the contract.




                                                                                   Page 46 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

       The prohibition only applies to a contract with a value of $100,000 or more that are:

          1   Paid primarily from public funds;
          2   Between a public entity and a company with at least 50 full-time employees; and
          3   Renewed or entered into on or after August 1, 2024.

       The law clarifies that a company does not “discriminate against a firearm entity or firearm
       trade association” if it if it refuses to engage in the trade of any goods or services, refrains
       from continuing an existing business relationship, or declines to enter into, modifies, or
       terminates an existing business relationship for any of the following reasons:

          1   To comply with federal, state, or local law, policy, or regulations or a directive by a
              regulator.
          2   For any traditional or ordinary business reason that is specific to the customer or
              potential customer and not based solely on an entity's or association's status as a
              firearm entity or firearm trade association. Further provides that "status" includes
              the lawful products and services provided by and lawful practices of firearm entities
              and firearm trade associations.

       The Attorney General is authorized to enforce requirements of the law and to recover all
       reasonable costs and attorney fees incurred.

       This provision will likely require additional clarification by the courts and/or Attorney
       General.

VI. Professional Services

Q.86. How are professional services for executive branch entities defined?
                                                                                       R.S. 38:2310

A.86. The phrase “professional services” has two meanings; one meaning specific to
      executive branch entities engaging in certain contracts for the procurement of professional
      services, and one meaning every other type of professional service.

       For executive branch entities, the phrase “professional services” has a very specific
       meaning that does not apply to local governmental entities or political subdivisions. In this
       context, professional services are a specific type of service sought by an executive branch
       entity that requires a specific kind a professional. These particular professional services
       are defined in R.S. 38:2310(7) to include contracts by executive branch agencies only for
       services performed by architects, engineers, or landscape architects. Further, the
       estimated project costs for these contracts must exceed one million dollars (R.S.
       38:2316). These contracts for services performed by an architect, engineer, or landscape
       architect must be bid according to R.S. 38:2312. Competence and qualifications of the
       contractor must be the deciding factors. See R.S. 38:2318.1(A)

Q.87. Are the professional services sought by local political subdivisions and other local
      entities subject to the Public Bid Law?

A.87. No. Local governments and political subdivisions are not required to advertise, receive
      bids or engage in competitive negotiations for contracts for professional services.


                                                                                        Page 47 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

       Nevertheless, sound practice dictates seeking the best price available for the service
       sought to be performed. Sound practices include seeking quotes, using an RFP process,
       or simply following the Public Bid Law. If an entity does follow the Public Bid Law when it
       is not required to, it must follow all the rules of Public Bid Law for that purchase.

Q.88. Are other types of contracts for services subject to the Public Bid Law?

A.88. No. The Public Bid Law is relevant to the procurement of materials and supplies and
      public works, not services.

Q.89. What laws apply to other contracts by executive branch agencies?
                                                                                  R.S. 39:1551

A.89. Other contracts by executive branch agencies for services are addressed in the State
      Procurement Code found at R.S. 39:1551, et seq.

Q.90. Are garbage contracts professional services contracts?                    R.S.33:4169.1

A.90. Yes, garbage contracts are professional services contracts. However, if the granting of a
      garbage contract creates an exclusive contract, they are required by R.S. 33:4169.1(A)(2)
      to be let through public bid.

       Exclusive contracts are defined under the law to mean, “a written agreement for the
       collection and disposal of residential garbage and trash throughout the entirety of the
       territorial jurisdiction of the respective parish or municipality.

VII. Louisiana Procurement Code (LPC)                                     R.S. 39:1551,et seq.


Q.91. What is the LPC?

A.91. The LPC is the set of procurement laws that executive branch agencies of the State are
      required to follow instead of the Public Bid Law when they are purchasing materials and
      supplies. The LPC, through the Office of State Procurement, provides a list of vendors
      and products that have been pre-bid for easy purchase by executive branch agencies.
      Click here to go to the Legislative Auditor’s Summary of the LPC.

Q.92. May a public entity that is subject to the Public Bid Law choose to be subject to the
      LPC?                                                               R.S. 38:2212.1(F)

A.92. Yes. Political subdivisions are authorized to adopt by ordinance or resolution all or any
      part of the LPC and its accompanying regulations for the procurement of material and
      supplies. If the political subdivision adopts the LPC for the procurement of materials and
      supplies, then the LPC and not the Public Bid Law applies to those purchases. Any public
      entity may, however, purchase materials, supplies, and equipment from the state contract
      under the LPC without actually adopting the LPC.

Q.93. May a local governmental entity purchase an item on the state contract?
                                                                           R.S. 39:1702




                                                                                   Page 48 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

A.93. Yes, a local entity may purchase an item on the state contract employing the cooperative
      purchasing provisions of R.S. 39:1701 et seq. The entity is not required to adopt the LPC
      "all or in part" for this transaction because the purchase is permitted through the Public
      Bid Law pursuant to R.S. 38:2212.1(F). As a matter of prudent administration, the
      governing body should, at a minimum, document the details for the purchase through
      resolution, ordinance, or minutes.

Q.94. May a local governmental entity purchase an item from a local vendor at the state
      bid price?                                                        R.S. 39:1710

A.94. Yes, R.S. 39:1710 allows these purchases with certain limitations. The statute provides
      that:

        When a local governing authority purchases an item at the state bid price
        through a local vendor, the local governing authority may pay to the local
        vendor the costs for shipping, preparation, and delivery of the item,
        provided that these costs shall not exceed the state bid price by seven
        percent on purchases up to ten thousand dollars, five percent on purchases
        over ten thousand dollars and up to twenty thousand dollars, and three
        percent on purchases over twenty thousand dollars.

        The Attorney General in AG Op. No. 96-0044 opined that the following steps would be
        required to comply with the statute:

               In order to facilitate use of these provisions, we would advise that the following
               steps be taken by a local governing authority:

               1. Determine from State Central Purchasing (Office of State Procurement) if there
               is a competitively bid state contract for the needed material or supply and obtain
               the State Contract Number and the specification for the item on state contract.

               2. Contact a local vendor for the item to determine if he/she can provide the item
               meeting the exact same specification as the state contract item and obtain a
               written price quote for delivery of the item to the local governing authority. While
               the statute provides no definition for the word “local”, it is interpreted in this context
               to mean a vendor situated within the boundaries of the governing authority
               seeking to make the purchase.

               3. If the delivered price offered by the local vendor is within the percentages set
               forth in the statute for contracts of various values, a purchase order may be issued
               by the local governing authority to the local vendor, reflecting the state contract
               number, state contract specification, state contract price and the markup allowed
               to the local vendor for shipping, preparation and delivery of the item(s).

               4. A copy of the local governing authority's purchase order shall be furnished to
               the State Central Purchasing Office (Office of State Procurement) for monitoring
               compliance with the provisions of R.S. 39:1710.

               The statute in question is an exception to the otherwise sweeping requirement of
               R.S. 38:2212.1(A)(1) that all purchases above the contract amount (presently



                                                                                         Page 49 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

               $60,000) made by a public entity with public funds be made by sealed bid pursuant
               to advertising. The procedures set forth above are intended to assure compliance
               with the letter and spirit of both the Public Bid Law (R.S. 38:2211-2237) and R.S.
               39:1710.


        In addition, when purchasing a vehicle off of State contract from a local vendor, the Office
        of State Procurement currently considers the following to be part of the State contract:
           • The base model vehicle on the current State contract, and
           • Manufacturer configuration options at the Dealer-Cost price (i.e. the fixed price the
               manufacturer charges to all dealers).

        Therefore, the public entity purchasing a vehicle from a local vendor should document
        the following in its contract files and in its submission to the Office of State Procurement,
        upon completion of the purchase:
           • The specifications and cost of the base vehicle reflecting that it is the same as the
                one on the current State contract at time of purchase;
           • An itemized list of any additional manufacturer offered configuration options
                included in the purchase, noting the dealer-cost price set by the manufacturer (The
                Office of State Procurement recommends that this be provided to the public entity
                on Dealer letter head); and
           • An itemized invoice for any dealer charges for shipping, preparation, and delivery
                of the vehicle, showing that the amount charged does not exceed the percentage
                allowed under R.S. 39:1710.

        For additional information or clarification on current State contracts, public entities should
        contact the Office of State Procurement at (225) 342-8010 or at doa-
        osphelpdesk@la.gov.

               Questions on State vehicle contracts should be directed to the Office of State
               Procurement through Amy Gotreaux at (225) 342-9200 or through email at
               amy.gotreaux@la.gov.




VIII. Retainage

Q.95. Is a public works contract required to contain a retainage fee?
                                                                                      R.S. 38:2248

A.95. There is not a requirement that a public works contract contain a retainage fee; however,
      R.S. 38:2248 provides that if an entity chooses to use a retainage fee in its public works
      contract, that fee cannot exceed 10% if the contract price is less than $500,000 and it
      cannot exceed 5% if that contract price is $500,000 or more.




                                                                                       Page 50 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

IX. Enforcement of Payments under Contract

Q.96. What actions may a contractor take to enforce payments by public entities
      which are due and payable under the public contract?
                                                                 R.S. 38:2191

A.96. R.S. 38:2191(A) requires all public entities to promptly pay all obligations, including
      approved change orders, arising under public contracts when the obligations become
      due and payable under the contract. It further provides that ‘[a]ll progressive stage
      payments and final payments shall be paid when they respectively become due and
      payable under the contract.”
      A contractor, pursuant to R.S. 38:2191(D), may file a mandamus action with the
      district court to compel the payment of sums due (progressive payments or final
      payments) under the contract, up to the amount of the appropriation made for the
      award and execution of the contract, including any authorized change orders.

       Once a public entity receives a certified request for payment for a progressive stage
       payment from a contractor, the public entity has forty-five days to make payment. If
       the public entity fails to make such progressive stage payment within forty-five days
       of receipt of a certified payment demand, without reasonable cause, the public entity
       shall be liable for reasonable attorney fees and interest. The contractor may then file
       a mandamus action under R.S. 38:2191(D).

       If a public entity fails to make any final payments after final acceptance within forty -
       five days of receiving a clear lien certificate from a contractor, the public entity shall
       be liable for reasonable attorney fees and interest. The contractor may then file a
       mandamus action under R.S. 38:2191(D).

       For further discussion on R.S. 38:2191 see Woodrow Wilson Construction LLC v.
       Orleans Parish School Board, 245 So.3d 1 (La. App. 4 Cir. 04/18/18) and Law
       Industries, LLC v. Board of Supervisors of Louisiana State University , 300 So.3d21
       (La. App. 1 Cir. 03/02/20).

       R.S. 38:2248, addresses retainage fee withholding of payments by public entities.
       R.S. 38:2248(C) addresses and authorizes the withholding of liquidated damages by
       public entities for public works contracts for flood protection projects or integrated
       coastal protection projects, notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, including
       R.S. 38:2191.

           R.S. 38:2211(A)(7) defines liquidated damages as follows:

              “Liquidated Damages” means a fixed sum of damages stipulated
              in a public works construction contract that are intended to
              compensate a public entity as a result of a delay in performance
              by the contractor and may be assessed for a project not bei ng
              substantially complete within the time provided for by the public
              works contract.

              “Substantial completion” is defined in R.S. 38:2241.1(B) as the
              finishing of construction, in accordance with the contract


                                                                                  Page 51 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

              documents as modified by any change orders agreed to by the
              parties, to the extent that the public entity can use or occupy the
              public works or use or occupy the specified area of the public
              works for the use for which it was intended.


X. Telecommunications or Video Surveillance Equipment

Q.97. Are there any additional restrictions/requirements on the procurement of
      telecommunications or video surveillance equipment and services?

A.97. Yes. R.S. 38:2237.1 provides that agencies and certain educational entities of the State,
      as defined in R.S. 39:1753.1(A), shall not procure certain prohibited telecommunications
      or video surveillance equipment or services as defined in R.S. 39:1753.1(A).

       R.S. 39:1753.1(A) defines “agency” to mean:

          ➢ any department, office, division, commission, council, board, bureau, committee,
            institution, agency, government corporation, or other establishment or official of
            the executive branch of State government or any parish, city, town, governmental
            body;
          ➢ any other political subdivision of the State or public agency, thereof;
          ➢ any public authority;
          ➢ any public educational, health, or other institution; and
          ➢ any other entity, to the extent provided by law, which expends public funds for the
            acquisition or leasing of supplies, services, major repairs, and construction.

       “Certain educational entities” are defined under R.S. 39:1753.1(A)(2) to mean:

          ➢ all public elementary, secondary, or postsecondary education schools, institutions,
            and governing authorities;

          ➢ nonpublic elementary, secondary, and postsecondary schools, institutions, and
            governing authorities that receive State funds; and

          ➢ proprietary schools that receive State funds.


       The above entities shall not procure prohibited telecommunications or video surveillance
       equipment or services, which under R.S. 39:1753.1(A)(4), include all of the following:

          ➢ Telecommunications equipment produced by Huawei Technologies Company or
            ZTE Corporation, or any subsidiary or affiliate of such entities, as described in
            Section 889(f)(3)(A) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for
            Fiscal Year 2019;

          ➢ Video surveillance equipment or telecommunications equipment produced by
            Hytera Communications Corporation, Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology
            Company, Dahua Technology Company, or any subsidiary or affiliate of such




                                                                                 Page 52 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

              entities, as described in Section 889(f)(3)(B) of the John S. McCain National
              Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019;

           ➢ Telecommunications or video surveillance equipment or services produced or
             provided by an entity found to be owned, controlled, or otherwise connected to the
             government of the People's Republic of China, as described in Section 889(f)(3)(D)
             of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019;

           ➢ Any product or equipment, regardless of manufacturer, containing as a component
             any equipment identified above. This may include but is not limited to the following:

               • Computers or other equipment containing a component which enables any
                 form of network connectivity or telecommunications regardless of whether
                 the equipment is regularly connected to a network.

               • Building automation, environmental controls, access controls, or facility
                 management and monitoring systems.

           ➢ Voting machines, peripherals, and election systems that are a product, or a
             component thereof, that is identified as being produced by any of the above
             manufacturers; and

           ➢ Any services provided using any equipment as described above.

Prior to the procurement of telecommunications or video surveillance equipment or services, the
vendor shall provide documentation by affidavit that the equipment or services to be procured are
not prohibited telecommunications or video surveillance equipment or services as defined above.
Please see Vendor Affidavit Template.

No procurement shall be made from a vendor or other entity who fails to provide the required
documentation and affidavit.

Any procurement of prohibited telecommunications or video surveillance equipment or services
or in violation of any other requirements of R.S. 38:2237.1 shall be void.

Any vendor or other entity who provides the affidavit and documentation required in
R.S. 38:2237.1 and is found to have supplied telecommunications or video surveillance
equipment or services that were prohibited at the time of procurement, shall, at its own expense,
replace the prohibited telecommunications or video surveillance equipment or services with
nonprohibited equipment or services of at least equal quality and performance.

Compliance with R.S. 38:2237.1 is subject to audit by the Louisiana Legislative Auditor.

XI. CMAR

Q.98. What is CMAR and how can it be used?
                                                                               R.S. 38:2225.2.4

A.98. CMAR, which stands for Construction Manager at Risk, is an alternative to traditional
      public bid procurement, R.S. 2225.2.4(A)(2).


                                                                                   Page 53 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026



Definition

The law defines CMAR as “a delivery method by which the owner uses a design professional,
who is engaged by the owner for professional predesign or design services, or both. The public
entity (as defined pursuant to R.S. 38:2211), referred to as the “owner” in the statute, contracts
separately with a CMAR contractor to engage in the preconstruction phase. As specified in the
statute, the same CMAR contractor may also provide construction services to build the project.
R.S. 38:2225.2.4(B)(1). CMAR allows a contractor to be involved in the preconstruction phase to
assist in determining the constructability of the project. R.S. 38:2225.2.4(B)(2)(a). With CMAR,
the construction manager acts as an agent of the owner to complete a project within a guaranteed
maximum price.

Use: R.S. 38:2225.2.4(A)(2)

The statute sets forth several reasons for using the CMAR method:
       • collaboration and cost control;
       • concurrent execution of design and construction;
       • a complex project with a tight time frame;
       • owner, designer, and contractor with mutual project goals;
       • risk identification controlled by owner; and
       • minimization of the risk of construction and design disputes by using a collaborative
           process.
Restrictions: R.S. 38:2225.2.4(A)(3)*.

The statute specifically provides restrictions on the use of CMAR, stating that CMAR “shall not be
used for any project that is estimated to cost less than five million dollars, exclusive of a hospital
service district as defined in R.S. 46:1072(2)(a) that may not use CMAR for any project estimated
to cost less than two million dollars.” Further, for any project that is estimated to cost less than
$15 million dollars, the public entity “shall deliver written notification of the proposed CMAR project
by name and description of the project, together with the reason to use CMAR, to the House and
Senate transportation, highways, and public works committees for review and approval” at least
sixty (60) days prior to proceeding to use CMAR for such project.



Notice: R.S. 38:2225.2.4(C)

The statute provides that any owner who makes the determination to use the CMAR method shall
indicate such intent in the request for qualifications to procure a CMAR contractor and the reasons
it deems such method to be in the public interest and beneficial to the owner.

Legal challenges: R.S. 38:2225.2.4(D)

The statute provides that no challenge shall be made “by any legal process to the choice of the
successful construction manager at risk contractor except for fraud, bias for pecuniary or personal
reasons not related to the taxpayers' interest, or arbitrary and capricious selection by the owner.”

RFQ Process:



                                                                                        Page 54 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

   •   Process requires use of an RFQ process is used to select construction manager.
       Selection is made by selection review committee composed of:
          o One design professional in same discipline of but not involved in, project.
          o One licensed contractor in same discipline of but not involved in, project.
          o One representative of owner.
          o Two members at large. R.S. 38:2225.2.4(B)(5).

   •   RFQ shall be advertised in official journal of owner and, if one exists, on owner’s website.
       Advertisement must be at least twice within the 30-day period prior to deadline for receipt
       of responses. R.S. 38:2225.2.4(F)(1).

   •   RFQ shall include:
         o Preconstruction scope of services;
         o Submittal criteria for project;
         o Procurement grading criteria;
         o Scoring methodology;
         o Total fees and compensation payable to CMAR contractor for preconstruction
             services and
         o Estimate of probable costs for the project R.S. 38:2225.2.4(F)(2).

   •   The RFQ may request that proposers include the following in response to the RFQ, as
       well as any other appropriate factors that would, in the opinion of the owner, demonstrate
       the capability of the proposer to perform the role of CMAR contractor:
           o The proposer's surety.
           o Construction methodologies previously used by the proposer on other projects.
           o Extent to which the proposer intends to self-perform portions of the work, if
               applicable.
           o Past performance of the proposer including timely completion of other public
               works projects of similar complexity and size.
           o Proposed management and staffing for the project.
           o The proposer's last safety record to include current experience modification rate,
               or EMR, recordable incident rate, or RIR, lost work time incident rate, or other
               data as required by the owner.
           o The proposer's standard safety plan R.S. 38:2225.2.4(F)(3).



Recommendation and selection

   •   Within 90 days after deadline for responses to RFQ, selection review committee makes
       recommendation to owner. R.S. 38:2225.2.4(F)(4).

          o   The results of the selection review committee, inclusive of its findings, grading,
              score sheets, and recommendations, shall be available for review by all proposers
              and shall be deemed public records.
          o   The exceptions to the Open Meetings Law are applicable to the selection review
              committee meetings where individual proposers will be interviewed pursuant
              to R.S. 42:17(A)(10).




                                                                                    Page 55 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

   •   Because the benefits of using the CMAR method reduce as the design process
       progresses, the statute provides that the owner shall select the CMAR contractor either
       before, but not later than, when in the professional opinion of the owner's design
       professional, the design professional's design of the project is not more than thirty percent
       complete. R.S. 38:2225.2.4(F)(5).

   •   If the owner deems the highest scored or ranked proposer to be nonresponsive or
       nonresponsible, then the public entity may award the project to the next highest scored or
       ranked proposer. R.S. 38:2225.2.4(F)(5).

Award and execution of the contract: R.S. 38:2225.2.4(G)

   •   After award and execution of the contract with the CMAR contractor, the following actions
       shall proceed:

          o   The design professional, in consultation with the CMAR contractor, shall proceed
              with design services.

          o   The owner shall obtain an opinion of probable cost of the project from both the
              CMAR contractor and the design professional when final design of the project is
              not more than sixty percent complete, and again when final design of the project
              is not more than ninety percent complete.

          o   The CMAR contractor shall provide to the owner a guaranteed maximum price for
              construction of the project, before or upon completion of the final design.

          o    If the owner and CMAR contractor are able to negotiate, and to establish and
              agree upon a guaranteed maximum price, or GMP, to render construction services
              for the project, and additionally, to agree upon constructability, construction
              phasing and sequencing, and the maximum number of contract days to complete
              the project, the owner may then award the contract for construction services to the
              CMAR contractor for the construction phase of the contract.

          o   Once a guaranteed maximum price is agreed upon, the owner may contract with
              the CMAR contractor to undertake construction services.

          o   Additionally, the owner may determine and contract with the CMAR contractor to
              undertake specific items of construction services prior to agreement upon a GMP
              for such items, provided such undertaking is for the benefit of the project and a
              GMP for the undertaking can be agreed upon between the owner and CMAR
              contractor. Such items may benefit the project, including but not limited to items
              that require a long lead time, may further the understanding of unknown site
              conditions, or other items.

   •   If the owner and the CMAR contractor are not able to agree upon constructability,
       construction phasing and sequencing, the GMP for the project, the maximum number of
       contract days to complete the project, and to reach a negotiated agreement, then the
       project shall be re-advertised and publicly bid utilizing the design-bid-build delivery
       method, provided the CMAR contractor shall be prohibited from bidding on the project.




                                                                                     Page 56 of 65
       PUBLIC BID LAW
       REVISED 02/2026


       XII.       Procurement Training

       Q.99. What annual training requirements are there for municipal elected officials and
             employees on the Public Bid Law?         R.S. 33:1420.321 and R.S. 38:2225.6(D)2

    A.99. Beginning on July 1, 2026 and annually thereafter, all elected officials of a municipality
          and certain municipal employees shall complete a minimum of one (1) hour of annual
          training on procurement and the letting of public contracts pursuant to R.S. 38:2211, et
NEW       seq. as provided by the Legislative Auditor.
2025

                  The municipal employees who shall complete the above training are those whose job
                  duties include the following:

                               ▪   Procurement activities, including but not limited to the purchase of
                                   materials and supplies or public works; or
                               ▪   Drafting, managing, or supervision of contracts, including but not limited to
                                   procurement contracts, cooperative endeavor agreements, contracts for
                                   professional services, and the letting of public contracts under the Public
                                   Bid Law, R.S. 38:2211, et seq.

                  The Training shall include but not be limited to training on:

                               ▪   The Public Bid Law;
                               ▪   Public Contracts;
                               ▪   Change Orders; and
                               ▪   The letting of public contracts pursuant to R.S. 38:2211, et seq.

                  The training by the LLA may be provided through web-based means and through contracts
                  by the LLA with nonprofit entities or other organizations.

                  The LLA shall maintain records to document and certify completion of the training by
                  elected officials and employees of municipalities.

       XIII. Additional Legal Sources

       Relevant Attorney General Opinions

                  AG Op. No. 24-0151 The construction or fabrication of a custom fueling barge constitutes
NEW               the purchase of materials and supplies and must comply with the provisions of the Public
2025
                  Bid Law.

                  AG Op. No. 24-0101 The construction of a building on behalf of a parish industrial district
                  is considered a public works project and must be bid out if it exceeds the contract limit

       1
           Enacted by Act 434 of the 2025 Regular Session (eff. 06/20/2025)
       2
           Enacted by Act 436 of the 2025 Regular Session (eff. 06/20/2025)



                                                                                                 Page 57 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

     regardless of how the total cost of construction is divided between the public entity and
     the private tenant(s).

     AG Op. No. 24-0040 The prohibition in R.S. 38:2212(R) against a public entity
     owning or operating a manufacturing facility or plant to produce or manufacture
     construction materials does not prohibit a police jury from procuring and operating
     a pug mill to produce road construction materials as it is equipment and not a
     facility.

     AG Op. No. 23-0032 The requirement under R.S. 38:2212(H) that funds sufficient to meet
     or exceed the estimate of probable construction costs must be budgeted prior to a public
     entity advertising a public works project does not apply to contracts being let under the
     Construction Manager at Risk (CMAR) alternative method. However, a public entity must
     still comply with the Local Government Budget Act (LGBA) and any Home Rule Charter
     provisions, if applicable, in budgeting of CMAR projects.

     AG Op. No. 21-0114 – The donation of funds and land to a public entity for a public works
     project must occur prior to the advertisement of the public work by the public entity.

     AG Op. No. 21-0097 – The repair and alteration of public facilities or immovable property
     owned, used, or leased by a public entity are generally considered public works projects
     under the Public Bid Law.

     Such contracts will therefore require advertisement and letting in compliance with the
     Public Bid Law when the probable construction costs are estimated to exceed the contract
     limit ($260,000*).
     *Effective February 1, 2026. See R.S. 38:2212(C)(1) and January 2026 Louisiana Register


     Pursuant to R.S. 38:2212(U), contracts for the maintenance and repair of public facilities
     owned, controlled, or operated by a public entity with a minimum duration of two years for
     a fixed annual fee are not required to be advertised and let to the lowest bidder.

     AG Op. No. 21-0059 – The Public Bid Law prohibits a political subdivision from using an
     annual requirements or delivery contract process when advertising or letting out a public
     work project.

     AG Op. No. 20-0118 – The Public Bid Law is not applicable in cases of emergency
     provided the public entity has properly complied with the declaration and notice
     requirements set forth in    R.S. 38:2212(P).

     AG Op. No. 21-0005 – Fire, police, and EMS agencies may utilize either the “piggy
     backing” procurement method under the Local Services Law (R.S. 33:1324) or the method
     under the Public Bid Law (R.S. 38:321.1) as an additional procurement method in order
     to purchase materials and supplies provide all relevant steps are followed. However, they
     may not engage in qualified group purchasing organization methods that are solely
     available to hospitals and schools under current legislation.

     AG Op. No. 19-0170 – A public entity is not required to comply with the Public Bid Law in
     the sale of naming rights to a public facility.



                                                                                Page 58 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

     AG Op. No. 19-0080 – A public entity may not make payment for the purchase of
     materials and supplies totaling more than $10,000 but less than $30,000 (now $30,000
     but less than $60,000) without obtaining no fewer than three quotes by telephone,
     facsimile, email, or any other printable electronic form as required under the Public Bid
     Law. Contracts for purchases of materials or supplies executed in violation of the
     provisions of the Public Bid Law shall be null and void.

     AG Op. No. 18-0006 - Tax exempt foundation created by charter school for the purpose
     of financing, constructing, and leasing building for use by charter school was a private
     entity and was not required to follow the public bid law for construction of a new school
     building on land subleased from the charter school utilizing private funds.

     AG Op. No. 17-0152 – With the enactment of R.S. 38:321.1, the Legislature provided
     parishes, municipalities and political subdivisions an additional procurement method to
     piggyback off of a contract procured by another political subdivision. However, the method
     for parishes, municipalities and other political subdivision to piggyback off of an existing
     public contract of another political subdivision under the Local Services Law (R.S.
     33:1324) is still available. A parish, municipality or political subdivision may use either
     method to piggyback provided all relevant steps are followed.

     AG Op. No. 16-0192 – R.S. 38:321.1 (piggy backing) is not applicable to public works
     contracts.

     AG Op. No. 16-0082 – A contract for routine and preventative maintenance dredging of
     port’s finger pier and docks is not a contract for public works, but a maintenance contract.
     Such maintenance contracts are specifically exempted from the definition of “public works”
     and are not required to be publicly bid, provided it has a term of less than two years.

     AG Op. No. 16-0153 – A contract whereby an agency negotiates and purchases
     insurance policies on behalf of a public entity is a contract for professional services and is
     not subject to the requirements of the Public Bid Law.

     AG Op. No. 16-0020 – Absent any legal authority to establish a local hiring preference or
     otherwise require contractors to hire local workers, the inclusion of such a requirement
     would be impermissible and against Louisiana Public Bid Law. Similarly, the inclusion and
     evaluation of a contractor’s efforts to hire local workers as part of the Public Bid Law
     solicitation process would be impermissible and against Louisiana Public Bid Law.

     AG Op. No. 15-0139 – Pursuant to La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(2) the City may not require
     potential bidders to complete either Document A305, or Statement C-451 as part of the
     pre-bid materials. The City may, however, include such forms as part of their bidding
     documents and include a requirement and instruction to potential bidders that such forms
     would be required to be completed and submitted by the apparent low bidder within ten
     days after the date bids are opened.

     **Note: La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(3)(b) provides that all bidders bidding on public works for East
     Baton Rouge or Jefferson Parish shall submit all bid forms required by statute or by the
     Louisiana Administrative Code to the governing authority of parish prior to the opening of
     all bids relative to a contract for public works.
     La. R.S. 38:2212(B)(2) provides that if a public entity adds any additional requirements for



                                                                                    Page 59 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

     information, unless mandated by State or Federal requirements, the requirements shall
     be void and not considered in the award of the contract.

     AG Op. No. 15-0080 - The AG discussed the issues whether a Volunteer Fire Department
     is a public entity and whether it must comply with state laws  including, but not
     limited to, the Open Meetings Law, Public Records Law, Public Bid Law, Local
     Government Budget Act, Audit Law, etc.

     AG Op. No. 15-0052 - The apparent low bidder’s failure to comply with the bid documents
     and instructions to bidders, which required all potential bidders to complete all spaces on
     the bid form including the space to provide a price for alternate no.1, renders their bid
     nonresponsive and the Town must reject their bid.

     AG Op. No. 15-0018 - Louisiana municipalities may not make a direct purchase from a
     NJPA contract. A NJPA contract is not a purchasing contract that was competitively bid
     by another Louisiana local political subdivision. As such, the piggyback direct purchasing
     alternative is not available to a Louisiana municipality.

     AG Op. No. 14-0217 – A contract between a sheriff’s office and a private business for the
     design and preparation of an informational report is a contract for service and is not subject
     to the provisions of the Public Bid Law. A contract for the printing of the informational
     report is a printing contract under R.S. 38:2255, which is subject to the provisions of the
     Public Bid Law in R.S. 38:2212.1.

     AG Op. No. 14-0142 - Louisiana’s Public Bid Law applies to the proposed dietary
     management services agreement, as the predominant component of the agreement calls
     for the purchase of materials and supplies.

     AG Op. No. 14-0005 - An exchange of public property between two public entities is
     authorized under the provisions of the Local Services Law, La. R.S. 33:1324. When
     property is exchanged between two public entities, those entities are not bound by the
     advertising and bidding requirements set forth in La. R.S. 33:4712 but the terms of the
     transfer or exchange must comply with the mandates of La. Const. art. VII, Sec. 14.

     AG Op. No. 12-0165 – A public entity may not “piggy-back” off a contract (including those
     established by a national cooperative purchasing organization) that has not been
     competitively bid by another Louisiana public entity.

     AG Op. No. 12-0066 - The Public Bid Law does not apply to a public works project under
     $150,000 (now $260,000*). However, by choosing to bid out the project, the municipality
     became bound by the requirements set forth in the bid document and should award the
     contract to the bidder whose bid is responsive and most advantageous to the municipality.
     Mentions the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeal’s holding in Concrete Busters of Louisiana
     Inc., which determined that a contract for demolition is a public work subject to the Public
     Bid Law. See [Q.10.] for additional information concerning demolition contracts.

     *Effective February 1, 2026. See R.S. 38:2212(C)(1) and January 2026 Louisiana Register


     AG Op. No. 11-0181 - A prospective bidder should not be penalized for failing to comply



                                                                                    Page 60 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

     with a bidding requirement or condition that is not allowed or authorized by Louisiana's
     Public Bid Law.

     AG Op. No. 11-0059 – Citing R.S. 33:4169.1 relative to municipal and parish collection
     and disposal of garbage and trash, the AG opines that contracts for the collection and
     disposal of solid waste, unless structured as an exclusive franchise, may be negotiated
     rather than awarded by public bid.

     AG Op. No. 10-0134 – If an entity requires attendance at a pre-bid conference, a bidder
     who does not attend the entire conference is disqualified.

     AG Op. No. 10-0058 - Debris removal is a contract for services that is not subject to the
     advertising and bidding requirements of Louisiana's Public Bid Law as long as the
     municipality does not violate other applicable local statutes or charter provisions.
     AG Op. No. 10-0026 – A demolition contract is a contract for services which is not subject
     to the advertising and bidding requirements of Louisiana's Public Bid Law as long as the
     municipality does not violate other applicable local statutes or charter provisions. See
     [Q.10.] For additional information concerning demolition contracts.

     AG Op. No. 09-0296 - A contract for the purchase of materials and supplies is no longer
     “viable” once the materials and supplies have been transferred to the public entity and
     payment has been received by the contract vendor. Further, a contract would no longer
     be “viable” if it has a specific term of duration and that term has passed.

     The AG opines that the following steps are necessary for a local political subdivision to
     piggy-back off an existing public contract of another local political subdivision pursuant to
     R.S. 33:1321-1327:

        1. Verify that the contract was bid in compliance with state law.

        2. Verify that the contract is still active, fresh, or “viable.”

        3. Obtain written consent or approval from the other public entity that bid the contract
           and obtain confirmation as to the contract number and, if necessary, the Council
           Resolution accepting the contract/bid.

        4. Confirm that the vendor and the product, services, materials, supplies or
                  equipment are the same and that the price is same or lower.

     AG Op. No. 09-0304 - Under Louisiana's Public Bid Law and beginning August 20, 2009,
     public entities are required to use the Louisiana Uniform Public Works Bid Form when
     soliciting bids for public works projects required by R.S. 38:2212.

     AG Op. No. 06-0051 - If a public entity uses the bid method for contract, then the entity is
     bound to follow the rules for Public Bid Law regardless of whether or not the Public Bid
     Law applied to the contract initially.

     Public Works




                                                                                   Page 61 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

     AG Op. No. 14-0033 - Pursuant R.S. 38:2212 and R.S. 38:2225.2, the AG opines that
     unless specifically authorized by law, a public entity has no authority to enter into a design-
     build contract. Instead, the public entity must employ the design-bid-build method, which
     would require the public entity to first obtain the services of a design professional and then
     publicly bid the construction of the project pursuant to the Public Bid Law.

     AG Op. No. 05-0445 - Absent an escalation clause in a public works contract, a
     municipality may not amend a public works contract to pay a contractor for increases in
     material cost required to perform under the contract.

     AG Op. No. 04-0079 - Public works contracts that do not exceed the contract limit are not
     subject to the advertising and bidding requirements of the Louisiana Public Bid Law and
     may be: undertaken by the public entity using its own employees; negotiated with one or
     more contractors; or let out for public bid.

     Materials and Supplies

     AG Op. No. 14-0142 - If a contract involves the merger of services with the purchase of
     materials and supplies, the entity must make a factual determination as to whether the
     predominant or substantial component of the contract is either services, or materials and
     supplies.

     If a contract has a substantial materials and supplies component compared to its services
     component, the AG has opined that the contract must be bid in accordance with
     Louisiana’s Public Bid Law. On the other hand, if the materials and supplies component
     of the contract is negligible, then the AG’s opinion is that the contract may be characterized
     as one for services, and, thus, not subject to the advertising and bidding requirements of
     Louisiana’s Public Bid Law.

     AG Op. No. 07-0278 - Public Bid Law applies to the proposed food services contract if
     the predominant component of the proposed food services contract is the purchase of
     food materials needed to prepare the meals.

     AG Op. No. 05-0314 - Louisiana Public Bid Law authorizes a school board purchasing a
     school bus to specify the type, quality or performance standards of the bus to be
     purchased, but the specifications must permit a functionally equivalent equal; the board
     must interpret its bid specifications in a fair and legal manner.

     AG Op. No. 01-0126 - When no bids are received in response to a solicitation, public
     entity should re-advertise and actively solicit bids from potential vendors in the area.
     Consideration should also be given to state contracts or contracts of other Louisiana public
     entities that may be accessed without bids. As a last resort, public body should consider
     whether the emergency provisions of the Public Bid Law may be used.

     Lowest Responsible Bidder

     AG Op. No. 13-0050 - It is generally well-settled that the provisions and requirements of Louisiana's
     Public Bid Law, as well as those provisions and requirements stated in the bid documents, shall
     not be waived by any public entity. See La. R.S. 38:2212 (B)(1); Hamp's Construction, LLC. v. City
     of New Orleans, 2005-0489 (La. 2/22/06), 924 So.2d 104; Beverly Construction Company, L.L.C.
     v. Parish of Jefferson, 2007-847 (La. App. 5 Cir. 2/6/08), 979 So.2d 551.



                                                                                          Page 62 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026


     Once a requirement is established, that requirement must be uniformly followed by all bidders. A
     failure to comply with any statutorily imposed requirement would render a bid non-responsive and
     would warrant a mandatory rejection by the public entity. The same consequences result from
     failure to comply with any validly imposed requirement stated in the public entity's bid documents.
     Numerous Louisiana courts have recognized that the statutory requirements, advertisement
     requirements, and bid form requirements, including those incorporated by reference to other
     documents, must be completely and accurately observed, and that a bidder's failure to comply with
     every detail can invalidate the bid. See Hamp's, supra, Beverly, supra.

     AG Op. No. 05-0140 - General rule prohibiting prequalification of bidders also prohibits using
     bidding documents to pre-qualify only Louisiana resident contractors for contract.

     Professional Services

     AG Op. No. 13-0135 - Louisiana courts have held that contracts for services, professional or
     otherwise, are not subject to the requirements of the Louisiana Public Bid Law. Numerous Attorney
     General Opinions have expressed the same conclusion in response to inquiries on a wide variety
     of service contracts.
     See generally AG Op. No. 00-0246, AG Op. No. 07-0278, and AG Op. No. 09-0252.

     Thus, under applicable Louisiana law, political subdivisions are generally free to contract for
     professional services without engaging in any sort of competitive bid process. Nevertheless, a
     political subdivision is not prohibited from implementing or establishing a policy or competitive bid
     process for procuring professional services. For example, a political subdivision may establish a
     policy that requires an RFP or Request for Qualifications (RFQ) process when procuring
     professional services.

     AG Op. No. 06-0183 - Legal services constitute a contract for professional services, which are not
     subject to the Louisiana Public Bid Law. Public Bid Law is not applicable when contracting for
     services, whether of a professional or other nature.
     AG Op. No. 05-0260 - Contract entered into by the Town of Amite for cemetery maintenance is a
     contract for services, not subject to the Public Bid Law.

     Emergencies

     AG Op. No.-06-0067 - Due to health and safety concerns at its post-Hurricane Katrina temporary
     courthouse facility, Plaquemines Parish may invoke the emergency provisions of the Public Bid
     Law in the construction of new temporary courthouse facilities.

     Computers and Computer Software

     AG Op. No. 13-0224 - In addition to the customary invitation to bid method for purchases of more
     than $30,000 (now $60,000), Louisiana's Public Bid Law allows political subdivisions to use the
     request for proposals process when procuring telecommunications or data processing systems,
     equipment, and related services pursuant to R.S. 38:2234, et seq. Therefore the AG opines that in
     addition to using the procurement methods set forth in R.S. 38:2212.1 and R.S. 38:2234, et seq.,
     a public entity subject to the Public Bid Law is also authorized to purchase computers and other
     computer related items directly from the state contract vendor pursuant to R.S. 39:1702.




                                                                                          Page 63 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026




XIV. Case law

Barriere Construction Co., L.L.C. v. Parish of Tangipahoa, 2018-0279 (La. App. 1 Cir. 9/24/18);259
So.3d 458.

                Summary: The court held that the provisions of the Public Bid Law, specifically
                R.S. 38:2212(B)(6)(c), which requires that in cases where there is a discrepancy
                between the base bid total and the sum of the extended unit prices, the unit price
                bid shall govern, and not the provisions of the Public Bid Law prohibiting waiver of
                provisions in the stated bid documents was applicable in regard to post-bid
                opening request by low bidder to clarify their bid.

F.H. Myers Construction Co. v. State of Louisiana, Division of Administration, Office of Facility
Planning and Control, 2013-2153 (La. App. 1 Cir. 06/18/14); 2014 WL 3702302, Writ Denied, 2014-C-
1793 (La. 11/07/14); 152 So.3d 183.

                Summary: The court held that R.S. 38:2216(H) prohibits the inclusion of
                contractual language which limits a contractor from recovery of delay damages
                only in circumstances where the delay is wholly attributable to the public entity.


Concrete Busters of Louisiana, Inc. v. The Board of Commissioners of the Port of New Orleans,
LA. 69 So.3d 484 (La. App. 4 Cir. 2/2/11), rehearing denied (02/25/2011)

                Summary: The court held that a contract for demolition is a public work and
                subject to Public Bid Law.

                See [Q.6.] For additional information concerning demolition contracts.

Beverly Const. Co., L.L.C. v. Parish of Jefferson, 979 So.2d 551, 2008 WL 331185
(La. App. 5 Cir., 2008).
                 Summary: The court held that the advertised bid requirement that corporate
                 resolution form be returned with the bid package could not be waived by the parish.


Hamp's Const., L.L.C. v. City of New Orleans, 924 So.2d 104 (La., 2006).

                Summary: The Supreme Court held that any requirements of the Public Bid Law,
                any requirements stated in the advertisement for bid, and any requirements
                required on the bid form cannot be waived by the public entity.

Regency Construction, Inc. v. Lafayette City-Parish Consolidated Government, 2003 WL 2127719,
847 So.2d 796 (La. App. 3 Cir. 6/4/2003), writ denied

                Summary: Contract for removal of Hurricane Lili debris from property including
                private property was not a public work and thus was not subject to Louisiana’s
                Public Bid Law.


Broadmoor, L.L.C. v. Ernest N. Morial New Orleans Exhibition Hall Authority, (App. 4 Cir. 2003), 865
So.2d 136, 2003-1996 (La. App. 4 Cir. 12/22/03), writ granted 868 So.2d 702, 2004-0211, 2004-0212



                                                                                            Page 64 of 65
PUBLIC BID LAW
REVISED 02/2026

(La. 2/11/04), affirmed 867 So.2d 651, 2004-0211, 2004-0212 (La. 3/18/04), rehearing denied, on
subsequent appeal 896 So.2d 251, 2004-1274, 2004-1275, 2004-1276 (La.App., writ denied 896 So.2d
985, 2005-0483 (La. 3/16/05), writ denied 896 So.2d 985, 2005- 0542 (La. 3/16/05).

               Summary: Public entity waived certain requirements mandated under Public Bid
               Law. For example, the bid form required the attachment of an insurance certificate
               thus making attachment a mandatory and not waivable requirement for bidder.
               Public board acted impermissibly in waiving the requirement and selecting bidder
               that did not include the certificate.

State Mach. & Equip. Sales, Inc. v. Livingston Parish Gravity Drainage No. 5, 98-1207 742 So.2d 26
(La. App. 1 Cir. 6/25/99)

               Summary: The court found that the evidence established that the bid
               specifications tracked one manufacturer's product description to such an extent
               that, although no brand name was specified, the criteria were so limited that the
               effect was that of a closed specification bid.

Board of Directors of the Industrial Development Board of the City of Gonzalez, LA v. All Taxpayers,
Property Owners, Citizens of the City of Gonzalez, LA, et al. (Cabela), 938 So.2d 11 2005-2298 (La.
2006)
               Summary: In reviewing application of the TIF Act, the Louisiana Supreme Court
               overturned its prior decision in City of Port Allen, 439 So.2d 399 (La. 1983)
               regarding Constitutional Article VII, §14 (A) and its prohibition of donations of public
               funds and public property. The Court held that the TIF Act was constitutional and
               that Louisiana Constitution Article VII, §14 (A)’s prohibition applied only to
               gratuitous donations in which there were no reciprocal obligations incurred by the
               parties.


XV. Additional Guidance (Flowcharts)

For additional procurement guidance, please see the following flowcharts:
Public Bid Flowcharts

Louisiana Procurement Code Summary Chart




                                                                                         Page 65 of 65
